---
title: "Turner Syndrome"
---

The typical female karyotype (“sex” chromosome make-up) for females is 46,XX. This means that the typical female has 46 chromosomes including two that look like X’s. People with Turner syndrome have only one X chromosome present and fully functional. This is sometimes referred to as 45,XO or 45,X karyotype. In a person with Turner Syndrome, female sex characteristics are usually present but underdeveloped compared to the typical female. <br><br>The following signs are more common in women with Turner Syndrome than in the general population: short stature, lymphodema (swelling of hands and feet), broad chest and widely spaced nipples, low hairline, low-set ears, and infertility.<br><br>However, Turner Syndrome shows up differently in different people—some signs associated with TS may be more obvious in one woman than in the next. <br><br>Mosaic Turner Syndrome can also occur. This is when some cells have two “sex” chromosomes (XX) but others only have one (X). A person can also have a mosaic in the form 46,XY/45X. Other mosaic types are also possible. When mosaic Turner Syndrome occurs, the person usually doesn’t have all the associated signs of TS, and may have other signs of intersex. <br><br>For more information on Turner’s Syndrome visit:<br><br>[Turner Syndrome at the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development][1]:&#8220;Turner Syndrome Society of the United States&#8221;:http://www.turner-syndrome-us.org/<br><br>

 [1]: http://turners.nichd.nih.gov/textileRef%3A16017204795d852e342db6e%3AlinkStartMarker