---
title: "News Release: American Academy of Pediatrics Position on Intersexuality"
---

> In 1996, the [American Academy of Pediatrics annual convention was picketed][1] by a group of intersex people. The <span class="caps">AAP</span> refused to talk with the picketers (and did not reply to a letter from <span class="caps">ISNA</span>), but they did distribute this press release to journalists who had come to cover the demonstration.<br><br>The American Academy of Pediatrics, a voice for children for over 60 years, is aware of the concerns and sensitive to the needs of intersexuals.<br><br>\* Intersexuals are individuals who are born with anatomical characteristics of both males and females.<br><br>\* The Academy is deeply concerned about the emotional, cognitive, and body image development of intersexuals, and believes that successful early genital surgery minimizes these issues.<br><br>\* Research on children with ambiguous genitalia has shown that a person&#8217;s sexual body image is largely a function of socialization, and children whose genetic sexes are not clearly reflected in external genitalia can be raised successfully as members of either sexes if the process begins before 2 1/2 years.<br><br>\* Management and understanding of intersex conditions has significantly improved, particularly over the last several decades.<br><br>* From the viewpoint of emotional development, 6 weeks to 15 months seems the optimal period for genital surgery.<br><br>The American Academy of Pediatrics is an organization of 51,000 pediatricians dedicated to the health, safety and well-being of infants, children and young adults.<br>

 [1]: /books/chrysalis/beck