---
title: "In Process"
---

# In Process

<p>\_\_Derick\_\_  </p>

<p>I don&#8217;t quite remember when I became aware that I was not quite like other boys. My father never discussed it, never mentioned it, and never asked me how I felt. My mother broke the news to me when I was about eight, but even then I didn&#8217;t know that I wasn&#8217;t &#8220;right,&#8221; though I had nothing to compare to. I remember being hauled off to a doctor&#8217;s office, where a steel probe was inserted into my meatus (the pee-hole in his penis \_\_&#8212;Ed\_\_.) And I remember the doctor saying something would have to be done. I, of course, had no idea what he meant&#8212;but I was soon to find out. My mother explained that I had something called hysposdadias and that I would be going into the hospital for an operation that would make me like other boys. At the time, I couldn&#8217;t understand the need for this. After all, I could urinate with no problem.  </p>

<p>This was in the late forties. Endocrinology wasn&#8217;t yet well established as a medical specialty, chromosomes were just around the corner, and the surgery for hypospadias was, at best, experimental. I awoke from the anesthetic in intense pain that I still remember vividly. An oversized catheter had been inserted to stretch the meatus. For the next two weeks, I fought back the urge to cry&#8212;because big boys don&#8217;t cry. Then another operation. I awoke; the catheter was gone. After a couple of days, I went home. I thought that it was all over&#8212;but it had only just begun. My mother explained that the surgeon didn&#8217;t do a good job and now I had to see a specialist, something about a plastic surgeon. My penis by now had a lot of scar tissue (it didn&#8217;t used to). I had also missed the start of the school year. When I eventually went to school, I was asked why I was in hospital. I couldn&#8217;t, wouldn&#8217;t answer. It became my secret.  </p>

<p>Over the next three years, I spent about 50% of the time in hospital, many stays. I had a total of sixteen operations, performed by the plastic surgeon. I remember waking up from those procedures, the inevitable catheter&#8212;followed by the inevitable bladder infection. I missed a lot of school and had to repeat a year. That usually only happens to academic failures. I didn&#8217;t like it, my friends were now in the next grade. Even worse, I was thirteen&#8212;the age when boys focus on sex, and like to display their enlarged genitals: locker room stuff. For the first time, I became very aware that my penis was not like theirs. Mine had a gash on the underside, and their penises were obviously larger than mine. Embarrassed, I withdrew from the locker room scene.  </p>

<p>But it gets worse. The other kids were now obsessed with masturbation. To my horror, although I could get an erection, I couldn&#8217;t masturbate. The surgery had so desensitized the glans that most of the feeling had gone. My artificially constructed urethra now began to develop a stricture (a narrowing \_\_&#8212;Ed\_\_.), necessitating an outpatient visit every three months to have it stretched, causing more pain. This continued until I went to college, at eighteen. My main concern was how to lose my virginity, something that everyone else seemed to have already done. I was very concerned that some female would look at my penis and say, &#8220;Oh my God! what happened?&#8221; or &#8220;I&#8217;m out of here.&#8221; I did eventually lose my virginity&#8212;under conditions of total darkness. I also became aware that my sex drive didn&#8217;t seem to be as strong as the other guys. That was probably due to some chromosomal combination that wasn&#8217;t right either, but what the hell. I was not even going to investigate that one.  </p>

<p>In summary, I wouldn&#8217;t wish the &#8220;corrective&#8221; surgery on anyone. I endured much pain, had my childhood partially destroyed, was deprived of crucial friendships, suffered endless self-doubts concerning my &#8220;manhood,&#8221; and for what?  </p>



<pre>&lt;br /&gt;To: Derick@domain.net&lt;br /&gt;From: cchase@isna.org (Cheryl Chase)&lt;br /&gt;Subject: Re: Write for Chrysalis?&lt;br /&gt;Cc:&lt;br /&gt;Bcc:&lt;br /&gt;X-Attachments:&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;Hi Derick,&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;What I would like you to write about is not just about the&lt;br /&gt;surgery, but about what it has been like to be intersexed,&lt;br /&gt;how you were treated and what it felt like (emotionally,&lt;br /&gt;physically), and how you wish you had been treated.&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;best,&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;cheryl&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;From: Derick@domain.net&lt;br /&gt;Date: Sat, 3 Aug 1996 14:37:35 -0400&lt;br /&gt;To: cchase@isna.org&lt;br /&gt;Subject: My Story&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;Cheryl..... is this what you are looking for?.... if you&lt;br /&gt;want it changed, expanded, etc... please let me know.....&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;Regards&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;Derick&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;To: Derick@domain.net&lt;br /&gt;Date: 6 Aug 1996&lt;br /&gt;From: cchase@isna.org (Cheryl Chase)&lt;br /&gt;Subject: Re: My Story&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;&gt;Cheryl..... is this what you are looking for?.... if you&lt;br /&gt;want it&lt;br /&gt;&gt;changed, expanded, etc... please let me know.....&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;Thank you!&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;If you could expand somewhat on what your life has been&lt;br /&gt;like since then... what you wrote seems to end at about 18.&lt;br /&gt;But it is now many years later; how did you fare, how did&lt;br /&gt;you connect with your current partner, how has sex been for&lt;br /&gt;you, and has your adult life been affected by your sexual&lt;br /&gt;difference?&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;Did you ever learn to masturbate? Are you orgasmic? Do you&lt;br /&gt;find pleasure in sex?&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;One of the goals of hypospadias surgery is to make you able&lt;br /&gt;to pee standing up. How did you pee before the surgery?&lt;br /&gt;After the surgery?&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;love,&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;cheryl&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;From: Derick@domain.net&lt;br /&gt;Date: Tue, 13 Aug 1996 11:47:41 -0400&lt;br /&gt;To: cchase@isna.org&lt;br /&gt;Subject: Re: Article&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;Cheryl,&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;I am having a struggle trying to put into words my inner&lt;br /&gt;feelings, emotions, etc. that you asked for as an addition&lt;br /&gt;to the stuff I sent you. I think it&#39;s because its something&lt;br /&gt;I&#39;ve never consciously tried to do.. it&#39;s been repressed&lt;br /&gt;for a long time. I&#39;ve only known about ISNA for about a&lt;br /&gt;month now... and I guess you could say that I am still in&lt;br /&gt;the process of coming out......&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;Derick&lt;br /&gt;&lt;br /&gt;</pre>