---
title: "What can I do to help ISNA?"
---

Many people contact us about how they might help <span class="caps">ISNA</span>. We hope the following suggestions help you find a meaningful way to support our mission:<br><br>[Donate to <span class="caps">ISNA</span>][1] and help us support our important work.<br><br> **Become an ally**: An ally is a partner, friend, family member, or associate who is not herself or himself [intersexed][2], but is commited to fighting social and medical structures that hurt and erase intersex people. You do not have to be an intersex person to help create a world free of shame, secrecy, and unwanted genital surgeries on intersex children.<br><br>\*If you are a medical professional\*: Find out what kind of treatments are provided to intersex people in your institution or clinic, and contact us so we can discuss how to improve them. Schedule a lunch or roundtable with your colleagues and invite someone from <span class="caps">ISNA</span> to attend.<br><br>\*If you are a medical or nursing student\*: Help us educate your professors and other students. Read and watch our materials and share them with others.<br><br>\*If you are a reporter\*: Write a story about intersex. Read the [suggested guidelines for writing about intersex][3] and contact us for further input.<br><br>\*If you are a teacher in humanities or social sciences\*: Integrate intersex issues into your courses by using our [library][4] to find books, articles, and videos for your classes. Also, watch our website in the Spring of 2006 for teaching packets you can purchase. <br><br>\*If you are a college student\*: Show our [documentary films][5] on your campus or have your school sponsor someone from <span class="caps">ISNA</span> for a campus presentation. Take direct action by speaking with your teachers if they misuse or misrepresent intersex issues in classrooom settings. Help us by getting the word out and making your professors and classmates aware of our website. If V-Day inspires you, consider putting on a V-Day event at your school with proceeds going to <span class="caps">ISNA</span> to support our work. <br><br>\*If you are an activist\*: Educate members of your organizations by sharing our materials and have the group pass a resolution in support of <span class="caps">ISNA</span>. Run a story about intersex in your newsletter. Make donations to <span class="caps">ISNA</span> when you can or purchase our materials so we can continue doing our important work.<br><br>*Add an &#8220;I&#8221; to your <span class="caps">LGBT</span> organization*: If you&#8217;re serious about doing advocacy work for intersex people, then adding an &#8220;I&#8221; might be appropriate for your organization. Rather than doing it in name only, we hope that organizations that choose to include an &#8220;I&#8221; do so because they want to educate their members about the issues intersex people face and are ready to commit to fighting the stigmatization of intersex people along with homophobia and transphobia. <br><br>

 [1]: /donate
 [2]: http://www.isna.org/faq/what_is_intersex
 [3]: http://www.isna.org/node/977
 [4]: http://www.isna.org/taxonomy/term/7
 [5]: http://www.isna.org/videos