---
title: "Intersex Studies to be Offered at Portland State University"
---

# Intersex Studies to be Offered at Portland State University

  
Syllabus Presented at Feb. 25 Open House  


  
February 4, 2002  


  
<b class=dr>Contact:</b> Emi Koyama, <emi@isna.org>  


  
During spring 2002 term starting in April, Emi Koyama, the Program  
Assistant for Intersex Society of North America, will teach the  
course "Intersexuality: An Interdisciplinary Exploration" at  
Portland State University through its student-run Chiron program.  
This course is believed to be the first of its kind as a for-credit,  
full-length course about intersexuality.  


  
The course consists of three main parts: First, students will learn  
biological and medical facts about intersexuality and the current  
treatment model toward intersex conditions. Second, they will  
discuss issues raised by intersex activists in the past decade and  
about the ongoing debate within medicine regarding reforming  
intersex treatment. Lastly, students will learn to critique medical,  
academic and popular culture materials produced about intersex. The  
course mixes lecture, discussion, film, as well as guest speakers.  
The registration is limited in size and will begin later this month.  


  
To familiarize potential students with the topic and get them  
interested in learning more about it by taking the course, Koyama  
will hold an "unofficial open house" on PSU campus in which she will  
present the syllabus for the course and answer questions about the  
course and about intersex issues in general. Co-sponsored by PSU  
Women's Resource Center, the open house will be held at Smith  
Memorial Center room 294 on February 25 at 4:00 pm. The syllabus is  
also avaialble via email by request in case someone cannot make the  
open house but is interested in learning more about the course.  


  
Intersex Society of North America is a 501(c)(3) non-profit  
organization dedicated to ending shame, secrecy and unwanted genital  
surgeries on intersex children. For more information about ISNA,  
visit  on the web.