---
title: Biology, the Law, and Definitions of Sex (Eric Vilain)
---

Media Briefing at American Association for Advancement of Science [Symposium on Biology, the Law, and Definitions of Sex][1] (February 18)\n\n[Eric Vilain, M.D., Ph.D.][2] Professor of Human Genetics, Pediatrics and Urology\nChief, Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics\nDirector, Laboratory of Sexual Medicine, Department of Urology\nDavid Geffen School of Medicine at <span class="caps">UCLA</span>\n\n# Recent advances in the genetics of sexual development have shown the extreme complexity of defining males and females from a biological standpoint. There is no one biological parameter that clearly defines sex.\n# There are differences between male and female brains very early in development. This suggests that sexualization of the brain happens very early during embryonic life.\n# Laws and policies that restrict the rights of individuals based on their sex are not rooted in biological reality. The definition of sex from a legal standpoint is arbitrary and should not impede the freedom of individuals. \n# Significant minorities of individuals are left out of simple civil rights because they don&#8217;t fit established categories of sex. Intersexed people are hurt by arbitrary definitions of sex. As doctors, we have a responsibility to care for our patients in more ways than just drugs and surgery. Intersex patients are born with a disability that makes sexual intimacy and thus intimate life partnering difficult. If they do end up with a partner whom they wish to marry, that is a great success, and they should not be impeded by irrational laws about definitions of sex. After all, in many cases, we, as doctors have assigned their sex fairly arbitrarily.\n\nIf you&#8217;re interested in this issue, please also see our <span class="caps">FAQ</span> on [intersex and the &#8216;same-sex&#8217; marriage debate.][3]

 [1]: /node/691
 [2]: http://www.uclaaccess.ucla.edu/cfm/access_faculty.CFM?FacultyKey=430\nAssociate
 [3]: /faq/marriage