---
title: "William Hanley, A.A., B.A."
---

[image:1048 class=bio_image]<br><br><br>\*William Hanley, A.A., B.A. (Board President)\* has been in the healthcare field for over 19 years, practicing as a Certified Occupational Therapy Assistant. He holds an A.A. in Occupational Therapy, B.A. in Healthcare Administration with a concentration in Non-Profit Administration and is currently working on a M.A. in Applied Urban and Medical Anthropology with an anticipated graduation in December 2006.<br> <br>Hanley&#8217;s undergraduate and graduate coursework have centered on a special interest in <span class="caps">GLBTI</span> studies, especially issues related to the healthcare needs of this population, and he brings this passion and expertise to the <span class="caps">ISNA</span> Board. Hanley believes there is a real need for a patient-centered model of healthcare that will better serve the <span class="caps">DSD</span> and transsexual populations. He is particularly interested in studies about the long-term effects of hormone replacement therapy (<span class="caps">HRT</span>) on patient well-being. <br> <br>Hanley also brings his own personal experience with intersex and a history of intersex activism to the board. Hanely was diagnosed with Klinefelter Syndrome at the age of 17 and later became an activist for equal rights, patient rights and various health disparities. He has published work in _Outward, 2004 Klinefelter&#8217;s Syndrome: A Personal Persepective_ and presented a paper entitled &#8220;Intersexuality and Aging Issues at the 2005 meeting of the Society for Applied Anthropology. He maintains active membership in both the Society for Applied Anthropology adn the American Society on Aging. <br><br>Prior to joining the board, Hanley was a contributor on the [Handbook for Parents and the Clinical Guidelines][1], new publications for both families and health care providers dealing with <span class="caps">DSD</span>s produced by <span class="caps">ISNA</span> and the <span class="caps">DSD</span> Consortium. <br><br><br>

 [1]: http://www.dsdguidelines.org/