---
title: Bruce Wilson, MD
---

**Bruce Wilson** received his M.D. from the University of Illinois Medical School in 1975 and is a board certified Pediatric Endocrinologist at DeVos Children’s Hospital in Grand Rapids, Michigan, and Clinical Associate Professor in the Department of Pediatrics and Human Development at Michigan State University. As a physician working with the U.S. armed services from 1978 to 1988, Dr. Wilson served children and families around the world, including in Iran, Germany, and Washington, D.C. at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center. Today at DeVos Children’s Hospital he leads multidisciplinary teams caring for children with chronic illnesses (including diabetes) and children with intersex. Although he maintains a full practice and teaches through the Michigan State University College of Human Medicine educational programs, including serving as the Director of the Pediatric Endocrine Section from 1989 to 1999, Dr. Wilson also maintains an active research program into the etiologies and psychosocial effects of pediatric endocrinologic conditions. His studies of these subjects have been published in the Annals of Clinical and Laboratory Science, Pediatric Cardiology, the Journal of Medical Genetics, and the Journal of Clinical Ethics. Dr. Wilson has presented papers at numerous professional conferences and parent conferences, and has received research grants from Eli Lilly, the Howard and Howard Foundation, and the <span class="caps">BSRG</span>. For his work in medical education he has three times been awarded the Residency Teaching Award at Michigan State.\n\n