---
title: "What's the difference between being transgender or transsexual and having an intersex condition?"
---

People who identify as transgender or transsexual are usually people who are born with typical male or female anatomies but feel as though they’ve been born into the “wrong body.” For example, a person who identifies as transgender or transsexual may have typical female anatomy but feel like a male and seek to become male by taking hormones or electing to have sex reassignment surgeries.<br><br>People who have intersex conditions have anatomy that is not considered typically male or female. Most people with intersex conditions come to medical attention because _doctors or parents notice something unusual about their bodies_. In contrast, people who are transgendered _have an internal experience of gender identity_ that is different from most people.<br><br>Many people confuse transgender and transsexual people with people with intersex conditions because they see two groups of people who would like to choose their own gender identity and sometimes those choices require hormonal treatments and/or surgery. These are similarities. It’s also true, albeit rare, that some people who have intersex conditions also decide to change genders at some point in their life, so some people with intersex conditions might also identify themselves as transgender or transsexual. <br><br>In spite of these similarities, these two groups should not be and cannot be thought of as one. The truth is that the vast majority of people with intersex conditions identify as male or female rather than transgender or transsexual. Thus, where all people who identify as transgender or transsexual experience problems with their gender identity, only a small portion of intersex people experience these problems. <br><br>It’s also important to understand the differences between these two groups because in spite of some similarities they face many different struggles, including different forms of discrimination. The differences between transgender and transsexual and intersex have been understood by lawmakers in countries such as Australia where [lawmakers have publicly acknowledged that people with intersex conditions have distinct needs from people who identify as transgender or transsexual][1] who identify as transgender or transsexual also face discrimination and deserve equality. We also believe that people with intersex conditions and folks who identify as transgender or transsexual can and should continue to work together on human rights issues; however, there are important differences to keep in mind so that both groups can work toward a better future. <br><br><br>

 [1]: http://home.vicnet.net.au/~aissg/transgender_and_intersex.htm.%5Cn%5CnPeople