---
title: "Ethics of Gender Assignment"
---

These ethics of gender assignment for children born with intersex conditions were presented by William Reiner, M.D. at the [Duckett Memorial Lecture][1], University of Michigan, July 21, 2000. Dr. Reiner is a physician in the Division of Child Psychiatry and in the Division of Pediatric Urology at Johns Hopkins University. The title of Dr. Reiner&#8217;s talk was &#8220;How I learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Unknown.&#8221;<br><br>h3. New Precepts<br><br># Sex assignment is never emergent or urgent.<br># We cannot manufacture unambiguous data to replace real ambiguity.<br># We are not medical experts if we do not know the outcome and the good of our proposed medical procedures.<br># The children know their gender identity.<br># The children&#8217;s intuition is the data.<br># Thus, we must espouse what the child tells us is his gender&#8212;medical procedures must come from those data, not to those data.<br># Gender will be assigned at or near birth&#8212;legally and socially.<br># We cannot know if our assignment will be correct, at the time of the child&#8217;s birth.<br># Therefore, we must choose what appears to be the likeliest gender identity.<br># If the children later tell us we are wrong, we shall then adjust accordingly.<br># We must be flexible and patient, and teach the parents flexibility and patience. <br><br>h3. Practicalities<br><br># The children cannot tell us until old enough to weild and manipulate vocabulary within syntax&#8212;about ages 6 to 8 years.<br># Yet gender will be assigned at or near birth&#8212;and we cannot know if our assignment will be correct. <br><br>h3. The Ethics of Gender Assignment<br><br># We must be flexible.<br># We must be observant.<br># We must listen. <br><br>h3. Surgical Realities<br><br># The children will want surgical (re)construction.<br># Surgery is never emergent or urgent.<br># We must not remove what a child may later want.<br># Puberty can be delayed if necessary (eg, 46,XX <span class="caps">CAH</span> Prader 5 children). <br><br>h3. Surgical Principles<br><br># Delay surgery until the child asks for it&#8212;based on gender identity.<br># Do not push surgery&#8212;for example:<br>\*\* Clitoral hypertrophy may not be undesired.<br>\*\* A 46,XX <span class="caps">CAH</span> Prader 5 child may not want the ovaries&#8212;but wait until she tells you.<br>** . . .and so on. <br>

 [1]: /events/ducket2000