---
title: "Sherri Groveman Morris"
---

# Sherri Groveman Morris

<p>[image:919 class=bio_image]  </p>

<p>\*Sherry Groveman Morris\* is an attorney and intersex activist who founded the US branch of the <a href="http://www.medhelp.org/www/ais/">Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome Support Group</a> in 1995. Ms. Groveman has been a frequent lecturer on the topic of intersex at medical conferences throughout the world. She has given presentations to the Royal Society of Medicine Endocrine Section, the Australasian Pediatric Endocrine Society and the European Pediatric Urology Association in Turkey. In addition, Ms. Groveman has been a featured speaker on the subject of intersex at the Los Angeles Lesbian and Gay Center, Parents and Friends of Lesbians and Gays (<span class="caps">PFLAG</span>) and Full Circle of Women (a retreat for transgendered and intersex women sponsored by the Los Angeles Center for Gender Sanity). She has had letters addressing intersex issues published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, American Family Physician Journal, and the Canadian Medical Association Journal. In addition, her article “The Hanukkah Bush; Ethical Implications in the Clinical Management of Intersex” was published in the Journal of Clinical Ethics and republished in the book <a href="http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/1555721001/qid%3D1126616547/sr%3D1-1/ref%3Dsr%5C_1%5C_1/103-5793418-1126211?v=glance&amp;s=books">Intersex in the Age of Ethics</a> which has become a standard text on the issue of intersex. She also has an article about the treatment of intersex children forthcoming in a collection edited by Erik Parens.</p>