---
title: "List of participating schools/groups"
---

  
We would like to thank the following people and schools/groups for  
making their cities intersex-friendly as well as vagina-friendly by  
using V-Day 2002 to educate the public about violence against intersex  
people, as well as those against all other women. If you know of any  
other people/schools/groups that should be listed here, please  
[let us know][1].  
  
<p class=m2>

  
[36] <b class=dr>Stanford University</b> is including [our fliers][2] in the program at its V-Day productions.  
</p><p class=m2>  
[35] Yahaira from <b class=dr>Lehman College</b> says: "We are very happy to hear V-DAY has merged with intersex on the anti violence campaign. We will be more than happy to distribute information on intersex  
Society of North America."  
</p><p class=m2>  
[34] Sarah from <b class=dr>University of Michigan - Dearborn</b> says: "I would like very much to incorporate your information on our Awareness  
Table." She has been given [our fliers][2].  
</p><p class=m2>  
[33] Risa from <b class=dr>Willamette University</b> is going to distribute [our fliers][2] in the lobby before the show.  
</p><p class=m2>  
[32] Corinna from <b class=dr>Reed College</b> in Emi's 'hood (Portland Oregon) says: "we'd like to add a monologue in the voice of an intersex person to our performance." We suggested using the excerpt from Esther Morris' "[The Missing Vagina Monologue][3]" which is printed in [our flier][2]. Also: Reed College is going to invite Emi to speak during gender/sexuality/race awareness week, March 25-30.  
</p><p class=m2>  
[31] Matthew from <b class=dr>Mount Allison University</b> in New Brunswick is interested in inviting an intersex speaker. Since we don't have anyone in New Brunswick that we can send, we suggested showing [our film][4] or distributing [materials][2].  
</p><p class=m2>  
[30] Windy from <b class=dr>University of Oregon</b> will make information about ISNA available during the "V-Week" and in the lobby at performances.  
</p><p class=m2>  
[29] Naomi from <b class=dr>Medford, MA V-Day</b> heard about us from our friends at [The Network/La Red][5] (thanks Cara, and thanks Gunner!), and says she wants to put information from ISNA in her production.  
</p><p class=m2>  
[28] Thanks to "moof," there will be copies of [our fliers][2] at the V-Day in <b class=dr>University of California, Los Angeles</b>.  
</p><p class=m2>  
[27] Audrey from <b class=dr>George Washington University</b> contacted us for suggestions to remedy the situation. We asked her to make our fliers available at the show.  
</p><p class=m2>  
[26] Meredith from <b class=dr>Claremont Colleges</b> says her campus will host a showing of the film, "[Hermaphrodites Speak!][4]" and possibly invite a speaker, as well as distributing ISNA's fliers.  
</p><p class=m2>  
[25] J. Michael from <b class=dr>Ithaca College</b> and others are "very concerned with issues facing intersexed individuals" and will distribute our fliers at its V-Day. The issue will be brought up at a "community dialogue" about the play as well.  
</p><p class=m2>  
[24] Mona from <b class=dr>New School University</b> in New York is going to include ISNA's fliers at her production of _The Vagina Monologues_. Hey Mona, did you figure out how to print the PDF?  
</p><p class=m2>  
[23] Alex from <b class=dr>Gainesville, FL V-Day</b> says "I will  
personally see to it that we do whatever corrective measures are in  
order and in compliance with our agreement with the larger V Day  
organization." We suggested distributing our [fliers][2] and directed Alex to [other suggestions][6].  
</p><p class=m2>  
[22] Kelsey from <b class=dr>Johns Hopkins University</b> is working on JHU to invite a [speaker][7] from ISNA sometime in the Spring.  
</p><p class=m2>  
[21] <b class=dr>University of California at Berkeley</b> is going to host Thea Hillman, an intersex activist and ISNA board member, as the [speaker][7] on Feb. 20th.  
</p><p class=m2>  
[20] Tiffany from <b class=dr>Eastern Washington University</b> says EWU will have a table at each show with informaiton about intersex. She is also thinking about ordering [our buttons][4] and sell them at the shows.  
</p><p class=m2>  
[19] Ciara from <b class=dr>University of Rochester</b> is interested in having ISNA's pamphlet put in the program at the performance there.  
</p><p class=m2>  
[18] Chana from <b class=dr>Ohio State University</b> will "supplement" their V-Day with information about intersex.  
</p><p class=m2>  
[17] Diane from <b class=dr>University of California, Davis</b> says that UC Davis Women's Resources & Research Center will distribute ISNA's fliers at the show.  
</p><p class=m2>  
[16] Nadia from <b class=dr>Roedean School</b> in E. Sussex, U.K. says:  
"Having received your letter to the V-Day Organisers, I must say that I was  
touched by both the content and the sentiment behind it. I had no idea that  
the condition was a widespread and as damaging as it appears to be. With  
that in mind, I am interested in donating a portion of the proceeds from my  
V-Day performance to your cause, with the other portion going to RAWA for  
the women in Afghanistan."  
</p><p class=m2>  
[15] Emi's friend Anne from <b class=dr>Humboldt State University</b> reports that they were planning to show a [film about intersex][8] as part of V-Day even before we contacted them. "I am going to talk to the organizing committee about including the fliers in the programs, but consider HSU onboard with the V-Day challenge," she says.  
</p><p class=m2>  
[14] Angela from <b class=dr>Queen's University</b> in Kingston, Ontario saw Emi's request for help in [Strap-on.org][9] and convinced campus V-Day coordinators to insert ISNA's flier in the program. Nice work!  
</p><p class=m2>  
[13] <b class=dr>Eve Ensler</b> talked about intersex issues from stage at her show on Jan. 8 in Boston before the play. Thanks Eve, and thanks everyone who have encouraged her to support ISNA!  
</p><p class=m2>  
[12] Laini from <b class=dr>University of Delaware</b> says: "What can I say. It is not often that your eyes are open to things that you're not familar with in this society. I'm touched by your message and feel that [the] information needs to shared with every community. We need to embrace and celebrate diversity on every level." She is interested in inviting an ISNA speaker to campus, plus distribute information.  
</p><p class=m2>  
[11] Debby from <b class=dr>Indiana University, Bloomington</b> says: "We will be glad to include information about this kind of violence against women... V-Day Bloomington is pleased to have your input!"  
</p><p class=m2>  
[10] Nidhi from <b class=dr>University of Wisconsin, Madison</b> says: "your thoughts have made an impact on those of us who are planning V-Day at UW-Madison and we are going to meet soon to decide how to address the trivialization of the intersex community in the play."  
</p><p class=m2>  
[9] Robin Garret, the Director of Women's Center at <b class=dr>West Chester University</b>, said "we will include the issues you are raising in our educational efforts and in other programs we do here on campus."  
</p><p class=m2>  
[8] Heather from <b class=dr>Mesa State College</b> (Grand Junction, CO) invited ISNA to have a booth or send the handout so that she can distribute it at the V-Day  
</p><p class=m2>  
[7] Joanna, a volunteer for <b class=dr>Appalachian State University</b> Women's Center says she is interested in inviting an ISNA speaker to present in the V-Day week. We're working with her on how we can make that happen.  
</p><p class=m2>  
[6] Breaking news: Willa Shalit, the executive director of <b class=dr>V-Day</b> supports ISNA's work, and says that V-Day would "do whatever we can to educate the world about your issues." V-Day and ISNA released [joint press release][10] on January 18.  
</p><p class=m2>  
[5] Robyn from <b class=dr>Truman State University</b> says: "Your  
letter shared a lot of great information that I would like to share  
with my campus. I will have to talk with my committee about what to  
include in our VDay week, but I will promise you that something will  
be said or written about. This is our 4th year of performing the  
monologues and we are always looking for some new topics to feature  
throughout the week."  
</p><p class=m2>  
[4] Gretchen from <b class=dr>Amherst College</b> says her school will distribute our information at the show. "Our coordinator for LBGT  
issues has some of your pamphlets she will be passing to us and  
she has a friend who has attended some of your workshops so we have  
some local resources as well. Thanks for getting the info out there."  
</p><p class=m2>  
[3] Kati from <b class=dr>Santa Monica City College</b> says:  
"You have helped open my eyes to a beautiful part of our society... I would be happy to hand out flyers from your organization at the event."  
</p><p class=m2>  
[2] Lauren from <b class=dr>University of Wyoming</b> says:  
"I will be including your handout in our programs for 'The Vagina Monologues.' I just wanted you to know that this issue has been brought up several times on the campus coordinator listserv and many people are concerned with the portrayal of this monologue."  
</p><p class=m2>  
[1] Women's Resource Center at <b class=dr>Portland State University</b> (Portland OR) will give [Intersex Initiative Portland][11] (ipdx) a table at the show; will include handout in the program; will write a letter to Eve; will contribute portion of the proceeds to ipdx.  
</p>

 [1]: mailto:emi@isna.org
 [2]: powertools.html
 [3]: /library/missingvagina.html
 [4]: store.html
 [5]: http://www.thenetworklared.org/
 [6]: suggestions.html
 [7]: speakers.html
 [8]: store-herm.html
 [9]: http://www.strap-on.org/
 [10]: /pr/pr20020118.html
 [11]: http://www.survivorproject.org/