---
title: "From Gene to Gender: 2nd International Symposium on Disorders of Sex Development (DSD)"
---

# From Gene to Gender: 2nd International Symposium on Disorders of Sex Development (DSD)

<div class="flexinode-body flexinode-2">
  <div class="flexinode-textarea-1">
    <div class="form-item">
      <br /> <label>description:</label><br /><br /> 
      
      <p>
        From Gene to Gender, 2nd International Symposium on Disorders of Sex Development (DSDs)
      </p>
      
      <br /><br />
      
      <p>
        August 31 - September 2, 2006<br /><br />Lübeck - Germany
      </p>
      
      <br /><br />
      
      <p>
        We are preparing a programme focussing on the impending changes in our appreciation of Disorders of Sex Development, from a biological, epidemiological, psychological, surgical and last but not least clinical point of view. The meeting will consist of plenary lectures, guided poster rounds and symposia focusing on molecular pathophysiology with relevant clinical implications, with internationally distinguished speakers presenting data and opinions. There will be ample time to present and discuss your own data.
      </p>
      
      <br /><br />
      
      <p>
        There will be an interesting scientific programme for basic science & clinical researchers, practicing clinicians, fellows in training, medical students or other professionals and people interested in the topic <span class="caps">DSD.</span> Furthermore, there will be a lecture on possibilities of research efforts for rare diseases within the proposed EU frame work funding programmes (FP7). We should aim at focussing our discussions on future efforts for an European perspective on research surrounding Disorders of Sex Development.
      </p>
      
      <br /><br />
      
      <p>
        <a href="http://www.netzwerk-is.uk-sh.de/is/index.php?id=61&L=1">Netzwerk Intersexualität homepage</a>
      </p>
      
      <br /><br />
      
      <p>
        <a href="http://www.netzwerk-is.uk-sh.de/is/index.php?id=156">Conference details</a>
      </p>
      
      <br /><br />
      
      <p>
        Standard disclaimer: Items posted at the <span class="caps">ISNA </span>events site are provided as a public service, and are not necessarily sponsored or endorsed by <span class="caps">ISNA.</span> To suggest an event for posting, go to the <a href="/about/contact">contact <span class="caps">ISNA</span></a> box at the upper right side of this screen.
      </p>
      
      <br />
    </div>
    
    <br />
  </div>
  
  <div class="flexinode-textfield-2">
    <div class="form-item">
      <br /> <label>Location:</label><br /><br /> Lübeck - Germany<br />
    </div>
    
    <br />
  </div>
</div>