---
title: Support Group Meets in Vancouver BC
---

<div class="flexinode-body flexinode-2">
  <div class="flexinode-textarea-1">
    <div class="form-item">
      \n <label>description:</label><br /> \n 
      
      <p>
        The Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome Support Group (<span class="caps">AISSG</span>) of Western Canada has a long history of providing much needed access to parent and peer support. While we have always had our meetings open to persons with <span class="caps"><span class="caps">AIS</span> </span>and a variety of similar conditions, for this meeting we are specifically inviting anyone who has a <a href="/faq/conditions">medically recognized</a> <span class="caps"><span class="caps">DSD</span> </span><a href="/node/1028">(Disorder of Sex Development)</a>
      </p>\n\n
      
      <p>
        When:<br /> \nSaturday, May 27th from 10am to 4pm.<br /> \n<span class="caps"><span class="caps">PRE</span></span>-<span class="caps">REGISTRATION</span> IS <span class="caps"><span class="caps">REQUIRED</span>.</span><br /> \n$15 per person. Lunch & refreshments will be served.
      </p>\n\n
      
      <p>
        Speakers: <br /> \nDan Metzger <span class="caps">MD, <span class="caps">FAAP</span>, <span class="caps">FRCPC</span>, </span>on sex development.<br /> \nDr Stacy Elliott, Clinical Professor in the Departments of Psychiatry & Urology at <span class="caps"><span class="caps">UBC</span> </span>& the Medical Director of the BC Center for Sexual Medicine at Vancouver Hospital, on sexual health.
      </p>\n\n
      
      <p>
        Participate in a research study<br /> \nby answering a questionnaire<br /> \nprior to the meeting:<br /> \nDr Elliott, along with her research colleage Dr Lori Brotto assistant professor in the Department of Gynaecology at <span class="caps"><span class="caps">UBC</span>, </span>will be conducting a research project which involves a sexual health questionnaire for adults with <span class="caps"><span class="caps">DSD</span></span>s. This research project has the approval of the ethics committee and has the approval number <span class="caps">B05</span>-1201. Dr. Elliott plans to share the results of her research with us at the May 27 meeting. You may elect to participate in the meeting without participating in the study.
      </p>\n\n
      
      <p>
        Who:<br /> \nThe meeting is designed for persons with <span class="caps"><span class="caps">AIS</span> </span>and other <span class="caps"><span class="caps">DSD</span></span>s resulting in spontaneously developed atypical reproductive anatomy; parents of children diagnosed with these conditions; partners and support persons for those with these conditions; family physicians of attendees.
      </p>\n\n
      
      <p>
        Why:<br /> \nThe objectives of this meeting are to meet others with similar medical histories; share stories in a confidential setting; give and receive support; network and share information.
      </p>\n\n
      
      <p>
        Info:<br /> \nLearn more about the sexual health research questionnaire and about the meeting (including the availability of inexpensive accommodation nearby), by contacting Nicky Philips at lesnick at shaw dot ca or call (604)274-9630.
      </p>\n\n
      
      <p>
        For more information about <span class="caps"><span class="caps">AIS</span> </span>and similar conditions, please visit the <a href="http://www.medhelp.org/www/ais/">Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome Support Group website</a>.
      </p>\n\n
      
      <p>
        Standard disclaimer:<br /> \nItems posted at the <span class="caps"><span class="caps">ISNA</span> </span>events site are provided as a public service, and are not necessarily sponsored or endorsed by <span class="caps"><span class="caps">ISNA</span>.</span> To suggest an event for posting, go to the <a href="/about/contact">contact <span class="caps"><span class="caps">ISNA</span></span></a> box on the righthand side of this screen.
      </p>\n
    </div>\n
  </div>
  
  <div class="flexinode-textfield-2">
    <div class="form-item">
      \n <label>Location:</label><br /> \n Mosaic Meeting Room, 1522 Commercial Drive, Vancouver, BC\n
    </div>\n
  </div>
</div>