---
title: The Sex That Dare Not Speak Its Name
---

\n

<!-- #bbinclude "header.incl" \n#TITLE#="Welcome to the Intersex Society of North America"\n-->\n\n 

<span class="caps">FOR</span> <span class="caps">IMMEDIATE</span> <span class="caps">RELEASE</span>  
\n April 29, 2000 <TT><FONT COLOR="#000000"><BR />\n <BR />\n <BR />\n The Sex That Dare Not Speak Its Name<BR />\n by Emily Nussbaum<BR />\n In Lingua Franca, May/June 99<BR />\n <BR />\n A long article by Emily Nussbaum in the current <BR />\n issue of Lingua Franca details the rise of the <BR />\n increasingly successful intersex social justice <BR />\n movement, its alliances with humanists and <BR />\n social scientists in the academy, and growing <BR />\n pockets of change within the medical <BR />\n community.<BR />\n <BR />\n <BR />\n <span class="caps">EXCERPT</span> <span class="caps">FROM</span> <span class="caps">THE</span> <span class="caps">ARTICLE</span><BR />\n <BR />\n According to Philip Gruppuso, a professor of <BR />\n pediatrics and biochemistry at Brown <BR />\n University who has recently embraced <span class="caps">ISNA</span>&#8217;s <BR />\n agenda, his colleagues intransigence is the <BR />\n result of basic medical conservatism mixed with <BR />\n a genuine emotional anxiety. "Whenever <BR />\n physicians are confronted with the fact that <BR />\n something that was standard is incorrect, you&#8217;re <BR />\n forced to think about all the damage you did," <BR />\n he explains. . . . But, Gruppuso worries that <BR />\n doctors are simply unwilling to grant expertise <BR />\n to academics in nonmedical disciplines, even <BR />\n when it would illuminate their own work. "We <BR />\n need to concede that we might be experts on <BR />\n the biology and science but not necessarily in <BR />\n psychology, sociology, and anthropology. I <BR />\n would hazard a guess that Suzanne Kessler <BR />\n [author of "Lessons from the Intersexed," <BR />\n Rutgers 1998] knows more about these diseases <BR />\n than 95% of pediatricians."<BR />\n <BR />\n One of the most striking examples of a medical <BR />\n turnaround is Judson Van Wyk, Kenan Professor <BR />\n of Pediatrics at the University of North Carolina <BR />\n School of Medicine and the author of the classic <BR />\n textbook chapter "Disorders of Sex <BR />\n Differentiation" on the diagnosis and surgical <BR />\n treatment of intersexual infants. . . . Van Wyk is <BR />\n now opposed to many of the protocols he <BR />\n helped establish. In his earlier work, "I claimed <BR />\n that children should not be assigned male <BR />\n unless it is reasonable to expect an adult <BR />\n phallus of adequate size. I wrote about the <BR />\n tragic outcomes associated with assigning a <BR />\n male gender to kids with small penises." &#8230; "I <BR />\n would take that back today." He would also take <BR />\n back his recommendations that doctors conceal <BR />\n intersex diagnoses from parents: "That&#8217;s one of <BR />\n the most damaging things I said in my chapter. <BR />\n I myself used to tell families that their child&#8217;s <BR />\n sex was &#8216;unfinished&#8217; and compare it to a cleft <BR />\n lip; I assumed they could not accept the truth."<BR />\n <BR />\n <BR />\n <span class="caps">WHERE</span> <BR />\n <BR />\n </FONT><FONT COLOR="#000000">Nussbaum, Emily. 1999. The Sex that Dare Not Speak \n Its Name. Lingua Franca, May/June, 42-51. Available from <a href="http://www.linguafranca.com/9905/intersexuals.html">http://www.linguafranca.com/9905/intersexuals.html</a>.<BR />\n <BR />\n ###<BR />\n The Intersex Society of North <BR />\n America (<span class="caps">ISNA</span>) is a peer support <BR />\n and advocacy group for people <BR />\n born with mixed sexual anatomy. <BR />\n For more information, visit our <BR />\n web site at </FONT><A HREF="http://www.isna.org/">http://www.isna.org</A></TT> \n\n