---
title: "John Otto at Center for Sex & Culture"
---

# John Otto at Center for Sex & Culture

<div class="flexinode-body flexinode-2">
  <div class="flexinode-textarea-1">
    <div class="form-item">
      <br /> <label>description:</label><br /><br /> 
      
      <p>
        <span class="caps">MLIS </span>candidate and former <span class="caps">ISNA</span> Intern, <a href="/node/931">John Otto</a> will present the workshop &#8220;Transgender & Intersex - Differences & Commonalities&#8221; at the <a href="http://www.sexandculture.org/pages/contact.html">Center for Sex & Culture</a>, 398 11th St. @ Harrison, San Francisco, on Wednesday, July 19th, 7-9pm
      </p>
      
      <br /><br />
      
      <p>
        Workshop description:
      </p>
      
      <br /><br />
      
      <p>
        Within gender studies, both transgenderism and intersex have become the cause celebre. Despite this newfound interest, many people have little understanding or have misconstrued ideas about transgenderism and intersex, sometimes confusing one for the other. The purpose of this workshop is to help participants better understand the political needs of transpeople and intersexed people by deepening understanding of the two categories and the institutional issues of both, where the commonalities lie and where they diverge.
      </p>
      
      <br /><br />
      
      <p>
        Participants will emerge with a better understanding of the categories &#8220;transgender&#8221; and &#8220;intersex,&#8221; acquire relevant vocabulary, and develop a better understanding of the political and legal issues that transpeople and intersexed people face. Attendees will have a better appreciation for where trans and intersex issues overlap and where they separate, in order to become better allies.
      </p>
      
      <br /><br />
      
      <p>
        Cost:
      </p>
      
      <br /><br />
      
      <p>
        $5 to $30, sliding scale. No one turned away for lack of funds.
      </p>
      
      <br /><br />
      
      <p>
        Standard disclaimer:
      </p>
      
      <br /><br />
      
      <p>
        Items posted at the <span class="caps">ISNA </span>events site are provided as a public service, and are not necessarily sponsored or endorsed by <span class="caps">ISNA.</span> To suggest an event for posting, go to the <a href="/about/contact">contact <span class="caps">ISNA</span></a> box at the upper right side of this screen.
      </p>
      
      <br />
    </div>
    
    <br />
  </div>
  
  <div class="flexinode-textfield-2">
    <div class="form-item">
      <br /> <label>Location:</label><br /><br /> Center for Sex & Culture, San Francisco<br />
    </div>
    
    <br />
  </div>
</div>