---
title: Otto & Goto at Western Washington University
---

<div class="flexinode-body flexinode-2">
  <div class="flexinode-textarea-1">
    <div class="form-item">
      \n <label>description:</label><br /> \n 
      
      <p>
        <span class="caps"><span class="caps">ISNA</span></span> First Responder and Board Member, <a href="/about/goto">Jane Goto,</a> will discuss the history of the intersex movement; relate her own story; and share some insights particularly relevant to future nurses, social workers and counselors. The short video <a href="/videos/total_patient_care">Total Patient Care: The Child with an Intersex Condition</a> will be shown, followed by time for questions.
      </p>\n\n
      
      <p>
        <a href="/node/931">John Otto, <span class="caps"><span class="caps">MLIS</span>,</span></a> will present &#8220;Transgender & Intersex &#8211; Differences & Commonalities&#8221;
      </p>\n\n
      
      <p>
        Within gender studies, both transgenderism and intersex have become the cause celebre. Despite this newfound interest, many people have little understanding or have misconstrued ideas about transgenderism and intersex, sometimes confusing one for the other. The purpose of this workshop is to help participants better understand the political needs of transpeople and intersexed people by deepening understanding of the two categories and the institutional issues of both, where the commonalities lie and where they diverge.
      </p>\n\n
      
      <p>
        Participants will emerge with a better understanding of the categories &#8220;transgender&#8221; and &#8220;intersex,&#8221; acquire relevant vocabulary, and develop a better understanding of the political and legal issues that transpeople and intersexed people face. Attendees will have a better appreciation for where trans and intersex issues overlap and where they separate, in order to become better allies.
      </p>\n\n
      
      <p>
        <a href="http://www.wwu.edu/">Western Washington University</a><br /> \nBellingham, Washington<br /> \nRoom: Science and Lecture 110
      </p>\n\n
      
      <p>
        This event is <span class="caps"><span class="caps">FREE</span> </span>and <span class="caps"><span class="caps">OPEN</span></span> TO <span class="caps"><span class="caps">THE</span> <span class="caps">PUBLIC</span>.</span> Limited seating available for guests.
      </p>\n\n
      
      <p>
        Standard disclaimer: Items posted at the <span class="caps"><span class="caps">ISNA</span> </span>events site are provided as a public service, and are not necessarily sponsored or endorsed by <span class="caps"><span class="caps">ISNA</span>.</span> To suggest an event for posting, go to the <a href="/about/contact">contact <span class="caps"><span class="caps">ISNA</span></span></a> box at the upper right side of this screen.
      </p>\n
    </div>\n
  </div>
  
  <div class="flexinode-textfield-2">
    <div class="form-item">
      \n <label>Location:</label><br /> \n Bellingham, WA\n
    </div>\n
  </div>
</div>