---
title: "ISNA Establishes Medical Advisory Board;\n    Nation&#8217;s Top Experts to Provide Guidance and Support"
---

<br> 

The Intersex Society of North America is extremely pleased to announce the<br> creation of a new Medical Advisory Board whose members will offer support<br> and guidance in the pursuit of <span class="caps">ISNA</span>&#8217;s mission. The inaugural members,<br> who will serve a two-year term, include some of the nation&#8217;s leading<br> experts in pediatric endocrinology, urology, general pediatrics, nursing,<br> psychiatry, psychology, social work, and bioethics. Dr. Vernon Rosario, Chair<br> of the Medical Advisory Board and a member of <span class="caps">ISNA</span>&#8217;s Board of Directors,<br> stated that &#8220;the <span class="caps">MAB</span> will help guide <span class="caps">ISNA</span>&#8217;s increasingly succesful<br> efforts to improve intersex treatment by promoting patient-centered care<br> and by supporting research on functional outcomes of various approaches to<br> treatment.&#8221; [Click [here][1] to see list of members.]<br> 

<span class="caps">ISNA</span>&#8217;s first decade has been remarkable for bringing a virtually invisible<br> issue forward and challenging a tradition of under-informed and often damaging<br> medical practice focused on creating the appearance of &#8220;normalcy.&#8221; Before<br> <span class="caps">ISNA</span>, decisions about management of intersex conditions tended to be shrouded<br> in secrecy and shame, and families faced with decision-making about intersex<br> on behalf of their newborns had no sources of information beyond traditional,<br> paternalistic medical practice and social prejudice. <span class="caps">ISNA</span> and courageous<br> people with intersex conditions have opened up debate where before there<br> was only silence, and have intelligently and compassionately developed<br> and advocated for a patient-centered model of care.<br> 

Over the past ten years, <span class="caps">ISNA</span> has moved from &#8220;outsider&#8221; to &#8220;insider&#8221; in<br> the medical community&#8211;our &#8220;reform paradigm&#8221; is now acknowledged<br> by an important minority of doctors, while even those doctors who disagree<br> with our program still work on a collegial basis with us. The Medical Advisory<br> Board is an indication of just how much progress <span class="caps">ISNA</span> has made over the<br> years in reshaping medical practices. Increasingly, we are working in partnership<br> with health care professionals to improve treatment practices for intersex.<br> 

Guided by basic ethical principles, <span class="caps">ISNA</span> works to shift the focus of doctors<br> toward the quality of life of their intersex patients as the measure<br> of their success, and to encourage doctors to base their treatment on principles<br> of<br> openness and respect that underlie other types of medical care. We advocate<br> for the following principles in understanding and treating intersex:<br> 

&#8226; Intersex is primarily a problem of shame and stigma, not of gender.  
<br>&#8226; The child is the patient, not the parents.  
<br>&#8226; Professional mental health care and peer support are essential.  
<br>&#8226; Honest, complete disclosure is good medicine, consistent with the principles<br> of contemporary medical ethics and law.  
<br>&#8226; All children should be assigned male or female, without surgery, based<br>on available evidence.  
<br>&#8226; <br> An individual&#8217;s sexual and reproductive integrity and autonomy<br> should be protected.  
<br>&#8226; A successful outcome is a person with a happy, fulfilling life.<br>

 [1]: ../about/advisoryboard.html