---
title: "SPATE OF NEW INTERSEX ARTICLES IN PROFESSIONAL MED LITERATURE"
---

<br><br>

For Immediate Release<br><br>

September 9, 1999<br><br>

Contact: Cheryl Chase <cchase@isna.org><br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

<span class="caps">SPATE</span> OF <span class="caps">NEW</span> <span class="caps">INTERSEX</span> <span class="caps">ARTICLES</span> IN <span class="caps">PROFESSIONAL</span><br><br>

<span class="caps">MEDICAL</span> <span class="caps">LITERATURE</span><br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

Ann Arbor, MI &#8212; Until just a few years, ago doctors<br><br>

who specialized in handling intersexed (children<br><br>

born with atypical sex anatomy &#8212; often labeled with<br><br>

the quaint and misleading medical anachronism<br><br>

"hermaphrodite") were confident that they knew<br><br>

what to do. In a model developed in U.S. in the 1950s,<br><br>

intersexuality was so disturbing that only doctors<br><br>

could deal with it. Intersexed patients and their<br><br>

families could be helped only if doctors used every<br><br>

tool at their disposal to eliminate ambiguity, and as<br><br>

quickly as possible.<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

The past six years, however, have witnessed a<br><br>

burgeoning, vocal, and articulate opposition to these<br><br>

medical protocols. The opposition comes from<br><br>

intersexed adults who feel they have been harmed by<br><br>

misguided and unscientific medical treatment, and<br><br>

from their allies in a wide variety of disciplines,<br><br>

including medicine, ethics, history, sociology,<br><br>

philosophy, psychology, anthropology, and law.<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

At last the medical literature has begun to<br><br>

acknowledge the growing controversy surrounding<br><br>

the standard treatment for intersex births.<br><br>

Physician&#8217;s Weekly, in August, carried a short debate<br><br>

over the advisibility of cosmetic genital surgery on<br><br>

infants, between pediatric endocrinologists Peter Lee<br><br>

(Pro) and Philip Gruppuso (Con).<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

The highly respected and influential <span class="caps">UCSF</span> pediatric<br><br>

endocrine duo Melvin Grumbach and Felix Conte<br><br>

announced, in a recent Journal of Pediatrics article,<br><br>

that they no longer recommend that a particular<br><br>

category of boys born with small penises be changed<br><br>

into girls during infancy. An accompanying<br><br>

editorial by Jud Van Wyk, also a well known name in<br><br>

pediatric endocrinology, mentions the influence of<br><br>

former patients organized to stop the surgeries, but<br><br>

fails to provide an accurate name or citation which<br><br>

would allow readers to contact <span class="caps">ISNA</span> or other support<br><br>

groups.<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

British physician Alizai and colleagues, in the May<br><br>

issue of the Journal of Urology, report that they have<br><br>

done a long-term follow up of 14 teenaged girls had<br><br>

been subjected to genital surgery during infancy to<br><br>

remove parts of their clitorises and make their<br><br>

vaginas more suitable for heterosexual intercourse.<br><br>

They discovered poor results in terms of appearance<br><br>

and scarring. Because the girls were examined under<br><br>

anesthesia, it does not appear that sensation or sexual<br><br>

response were evaluated. Nonetheless, the authors<br><br>

characterize the outcome of genital surgery as<br><br>

"disappointing," even when the surgery is<br><br>

performed by specialists. They call for an end to<br><br>

some cosmetic genital surgery on infants.<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

The July/August issue of Pediatric Nursing carries<br><br>

an article by intersex activist Cheryl Chase. Chase<br><br>

was solicited by the journal&#8217;s ethics editor, who was<br><br>

disturbed by an earlier article which gave strong<br><br>

consideration to using the courts to impose surgical<br><br>

sex change on an infant whose parents opposed it. Of<br><br>

note, the article is illustrated with a photo of<br><br>

intersexed activists who appear in a group, clothed,<br><br>

smiling and without their eyes blacked out.<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

"As much as we would like to think that . . . we always<br><br>

assign an appropriate gender to an infant with<br><br>

ambiguous genitalia, mistakes are inevitable,"<br><br>

concedes surgeon Kenneth Glassberg, in a Journal of<br><br>

Urology editorial. Unfortunately, he conflates<br><br>

surgery with sex assignment, equating calls for<br><br>

deferral of surgery to some sort of demand for public<br><br>

assignment of children as hermaprhodites. Glassberg<br><br>

cites one <span class="caps">ISNA</span> publication, but appears not to have<br><br>

understood that the article he cites is satire, and the<br><br>

citation he provides is grossly inaccurate and<br><br>

inadequate, thus preventing his readers (including<br><br>

intersexed former patients) from gaining access to<br><br>

first person narratives by intersexed people.<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

"We live in an age of increasing respect for minority<br><br>

rights," notes surgeon Ian Aaronson, in an editorial<br><br>

on "The Child with Ambiguous Genitalia" in the<br><br>

Journal of Infectious Urology. However, if genital<br><br>

surgery on infants were to be stopped, and<br><br>

intersexed children allowed to make choices about<br><br>

their own lives, it would "signify a return to the<br><br>

&#8216;dark ages&#8217; of intersex management, which has given<br><br>

rise to a host of psychological cripples."<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

<span class="caps">ARTICLES</span> <span class="caps">CITED</span><br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

Aaronson, Ian A. 1999. Editorial Comment: When and<br><br>

How to Screen? Infectious Urology 12 (4):113-118.<br><br>

<A HREF="http://www.medscape.com/SCP/IIU/1999/v12.n04/u3%20010.slav/u3010.slav-07.html">http://www.medscape.com/SCP/IIU/1999/v12.n04/u3</A><br><br>

<A HREF="http://www.medscape.com/SCP/IIU/1999/v12.n04/u3%20010.slav/u3010.slav-07.html">010.slav/u3010.slav-07.html</A>.<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

Alizai, N. K., David F. Thomas, R. J. Lilford, A. G.<br><br>

Batchelor, and Nick Johnson. 1999. Feminizing<br><br>

genitoplasty for congenital adrenal hyperplasia:<br><br>

what happens at puberty? Journal of Urology 161<br><br>

(5):1588-91.<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

Bin-Abbas, Bassam, Felix A. Conte, Melvin M.<br><br>

Grumbach, and Selna L. Kaplan. 1999. Congenital<br><br>

hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and micropenis:<br><br>

Why sex reversal is not indicated. Journal of<br><br>

Pediatrics 134 (5):579-583.<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

Chase, Cheryl. 1999. Rethinking treatment for<br><br>

ambiguous genitalia. Pediatric Nursing 25 (4):451-5.<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

Glassberg, Kenneth I. 1999. Editorial: Gender<br><br>

Assignment and the Pediatric Urologist. Journal of<br><br>

Urology 161:1308-10.<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

Lee, Peter, and Philip A. Gruppuso. 1999. Should<br><br>

cosmetic surgery be performed on the genitals of<br><br>

children born with ambiguous genitals?<br><br>

(Point/Counterpoint). Physician&#8217;s Weekly, August 16.<br><br>

<A HREF="http://www.physiciansweekly.com/archive/99/08_16_99/pc.html">http://www.physiciansweekly.com/archive/99/08_16_99/pc.html</A>.<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

Van Wyk, Jud. 1999. Should boys with micropenis be<br><br>

raised as girls? Journal of Pediatrics 134 (5):537-538.<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

###<br><br>

The Intersex Society of North America (<span class="caps">ISNA</span>)<br><br>

works to create a world free of shame, secrecy,<br><br>

and genital mutilation for intersex people. For more<br><br>

information, visit our web site at <A HREF="http://www.isna.org/">http://www.isna.org</A><br>