---
title: V-Day Challenge 2002 FAQ
---

### Questions about V-Day Challenge\n

#### Why are you protesting such a great event?<p class=m4>\nFirst of all, this is not a protest. We say that because we don&#8217;t want to give the impression that we oppose V-Day, which we actually think is fabulous, as it is doing so many wonderful things, or that we want people to boycott its performances. We are trying to use it as an opportunity to raise awareness about intersex experiences that are otherwise poorly portrayed by the play, 

_The Vagina Monologues_. Because the whole point of the play is to break the silence around our own bodies and celebrating them, we feel that our effort is an _addition_ to the spirit of the play.\n</p>

#### Who are you anyway?<p class=m4>\nV-Day Challenge 2002 is coordinated by Emi Koyama, the Program Assistant for Intersex Society of North America (

<span class="caps">ISNA</span>), with the help of many other intersex activists and allies. <span class="caps">ISNA</span> is a 501&#169;(3) non-profit organization dedicated to ending shame, secrecy and unwanted genital surgeries (sometimes referred to as &#8220;intersex genital mutilation&#8221;) on children born with intersex conditions. For more information about intersex or <span class="caps">ISNA</span>, read [Intersex & <span class="caps">ISNA</span> <span class="caps">FAQ</span>][1].\n</p>

### Questions about &#8220;The Vagina Monologues&#8221;\n

#### Don&#8217;t you think that the portion in question is actually making fun of the father&#8217;s misogynist comment?<p class=m4>\nThere can be, of course, multiple interpretations for any piece of art &#8211; but we do not think that this is the case because (1) the play calls this episode &#8220;a wonderful vagina fairy tale&#8221; &#8211; seemingly non-critical description, and (2) in the book (V-Day 2001 edition), Eve ends this monologue with the comment that she was melted by the love between the father and the daughter. It does not seem like she was criticizing the father.\n</p>

#### Isn&#8217;t this monologue also someone&#8217;s reality?<p class=m4>\nPerhaps. But what would you feel if the only monologue Eve chose to include about female genital cuttings in Africa was about a woman who is told by her father that her body needed to be cut for the enjoyment of her future husband, 

_and Eve described it as a &#8220;wonderful vagina fairy tale&#8221;?_ Gruesome picture, but this is how the play depicts cuttings of intersex genitals. Our concern is not that this monologue is included, but the fact that the play fails to give a _context_ to this episode.\n</p><p class=m4>\nThe monologues may be based on real interviews, but Eve Ensler has the \nfreedom of picking which episodes she would use, how to describe \nthem, and what other information to give. For example, it is \nentirely possible for her to offer additional facts about genital \ncuttings that happen in this country, describing the kinds of \ndamages they do the same way she described African genital cuttings. \nSince she chose not to offer this sort of information, we are \ndistributing information ourselves &#8211; and asking for your help in \ndoing so.\n</p>

#### Has anyone contacted Eve Ensler about this?<p class=m4>\nYes, several of us have, but most did not receive any reply (which is not surprising, since she must be receiving a large amount of letters). Esther Morris, who wrote the article &#8220;

[The Missing Vagina Monologue][2]&#8220; (Sojourner, March 2001) received a three-line letter thanking her for the information, but Eve declined to speak with her or other intersex people.\n</p><p class=m4>\nHowever, after we began our campaign, we got a call from the Executive Director of V-Day stating that Eve and V-Day support <span class="caps">ISNA</span>&#8217;s effort to raise awareness about the extent of violence and erasure against intersex people. We&#8217;re currently discussing how V-Day and <span class="caps">ISNA</span> can work together to end all violence against women and intersex people.\n</p>

#### Why protest a play? How is it different from dog fanatics protesting the musical &#8220;<span class="caps">CATS</span>&#8221; for misrepresenting dogs?<p class=m4>\nFirst, we are 

_not_ protesting, but are simply trying to add our voice. \nThat said, if you are a feminist you \nmust agree with me that there is a difference between depictions \nthat are simply misrepresentative, versus those that reinforce the \ninstitutional oppression against a stigmatized and marginalized group. \nFor example, a play that misrepresents experiences of women, people \nof color, <span class="caps">LGBT</span> people, etc. have a different impact than those that \nmisrepresent other groups that are not particularly targeted by \noppressions. Suppose that such a play being promoted as the best \nthing that happened in decades, and performed at 500+ schools \nacross the country as the centerpiece for a new movement &#8211; I can&#8217;t \nimagine that there won&#8217;t be any responses from progressive \norganizations.\n</p>

### Questions about <span class="caps">FGM</span> vs. <span class="caps">IGM</span>\n

#### Aren&#8217;t female genital mutilation and intersex surgery completely different practice, coming from completely different cultural contexts?<p class=m4>\nThey 

_are_ different, we agree. But there are some similarities. They are both performed ritually in their respective cultures, with little alternative available. They are both practiced not to address any particular health needs, but to address social and cultural discipline. They both often cause physical scars as well as serious emotional and sexual problems.\n</p><p class=m4>\nOn the other hand, there are some important differences. For example, female genital cuttings are performed as a rite of passage, whereas intersex genital cuttings are done toward a stigmatized minority in an effort to erase its existence. Female genital cuttings are illegal in the United States, but intersex genital cuttings are still considered a standard medical treatment and paid for by all major insurances. And lastly, while most female genital cuttings take place in formerly colonized countries, intersex genital cuttings happen _right here_ in the West.\n</p>

### Questions about how to help\n

#### I&#8217;m a V-Day organizer. How can I help?<p class=m4>\nPlease read our 

[list of suggestions][3]. Mostly, we want our handout distributed as an insert to the program so that all playgoers will learn about intersex (besides, the handout has an excerpt of Esther Morris&#8217; &#8220;[The Missing Vagina Monologues][2],&#8221; so it&#8217;s like getting an extra monologue!). We are also asking for a small portion of the proceeds to be donated to Intersex Society of North America or to [Survivor Project][4] (organization addressing the needs of intersex and trans survivors of domestic and sexual violence) to support our work, but this, obviously, is entirely up to you. If you think of any other creative ways to help, please [do let us know][5]!\n</p>

#### I&#8217;m a student/faculty/staff at a school where V-Day takes place. How can I help?<p class=m4>\nTalk to your campus V-Day organizers! Give them a copy of 

[our handout][6] and/or Emi&#8217;s [open letter][7] to V-Day organizers. Encourage them to consider our [list of suggestions][3] and fight violence against all women, including women born with intersex conditions.\n</p>

#### I&#8217;m an intersex ally. How can I help?<p class=m4>\nFirst of all, can we say that you rock? 

<span class="caps">YOU</span> <span class="caps">ROCK</span>! Okay okay&#8230; the answer your question depends on how much time and energy you are ready to contribute. We want people to contact their local schools that participate in V-Day College Campaign, and ask them if they are interested in [helping us too][3]; if not, we want people to distribute our handouts at the shows anyway, so that playgoers are educated about the issues intersex people face. How much of that work (or other work &#8211; use your imagination) you will do is up to you; if you are interested in helping us in any way, please [email us][5].\n</p><p class=m4>\nIf you have lots of energy, please consider becoming a [local/regional coordinator][8] for your area (as determined by you). That would mean you will coordinate with other people to hit multiple schools in your area.\n</p><p class=m4>\nAbove all, remember to [subscribe to <span class="caps">ISNA</span>-VD2002][9] to stay updated about what&#8217;s going on (this is an announcement-only list open to everybody).\n</p>

#### How do I know if there are going to be &#8220;The Vagina Monologues&#8221; in my area?<p class=m4>\nThere is a list of participating schools at 

[V-Day College Campaign][10] web site; if you are having trouble viewing it, [tell us][5] where you live and we&#8217;ll find out where all the performances are in your area. With 500+ schools participating in it, chances are there are several in your area.\n</p>

 [1]: ../../faq/index.html
 [2]: ../../library/missingvagina.html
 [3]: suggestions.html
 [4]: http://www.survivorproject.org/
 [5]: mailto:emi@isna.org
 [6]: powertools.html
 [7]: vday-email.html
 [8]: getinvolved.html
 [9]: /cgi-bin/mojo/mojo.cgi?f=s&l=ISNA-VD2002
 [10]: http://www.vday.org/college