---
title: "ISNA opens new office in Seattle; board expanded; plans launch of medical education video</h2>\n"
---

 <br> 

For Immediate Release: February 5, 2003  
<br>  
<br> <span class="caps">SEATTLE</span>, WA &#8211; The Intersex Society of North America (<span class="caps">ISNA</span>), an <br> advocacy and policy group for people with atypical genital and <br> reproductive anatomies, has moved its office to Seattle, Washington <br> from Petaluma, California.&nbsp; In addition, Dr. Vernon Rosario, <br> a physician and medical historian, has joined the Board of Directors.<br> 

"We hope to reach out to our many allies in the medical <br> and bioethics communities in Seattle and the Pacific Northwest, <br> as well as pursuing our social change agenda nationally and across <br> North America," stated <span class="caps">ISNA</span>&#8217;s Executive Director, Dr. Monica <br> Casper, Ph.D." Among other initiatives, we will be launching <br> an educational video that will offer the medical community a real <br> alternative to unnecessary surgeries on babies with intersex conditions."<br> 

Dr. Casper was referring to [First, <br> Do No Harm: Total Patient Care for Intersex][1], a documentary <br> film which presents a patient-centered approach to the health <br> needs of people with intersex conditions.&nbsp; New evidence and <br> advances in medical ethics have led to the need for revision in <br> the standard of care for intersex. Critiquing current medical <br> practices and exploring a more ethical and humane approach to <br> treatment, the film is compelling, hard-hitting, and deeply moving.<br> 

The video is currently [available <br> for purchase][1] on <span class="caps">ISNA</span>&#8217;s website&nbsp; and will be introduced <br> this year to medical schools and medical institutions across the <br> country. <span class="caps">ISNA</span> is releasing it in conjunction with a medical reform <br> "package" that includes information about textbook revision, <br> clinical guidelines for teaching intersex issues in medical schools, <br> and a parent&#8217;s handbook.&nbsp; <span class="caps">ISNA</span> will also establish a national <br> Medical Advisory Committee in 2003.<br> 

Dr. Vernon Rosario&#8217;s addition to the Board of Directors will <br> strengthen <span class="caps">ISNA</span>&#8217;s ties to the medical community. A child psychiatrist <br> in Los Angeles working in private practice and with <span class="caps">LGBTI</span> foster <br> children, Dr. Rosario received his Ph.D. in the History of Science <br> from Harvard University, and his M.D. from the Harvard Medical <br> School&#8212;M.I.T. Program in Health Sciences and Technology.&nbsp; <br> He is a widely published scholar whose&nbsp; current research <br> focuses on transgender and intersex children and adolescents.<br> 

###<br>

 [1]: ../store/store-tpc.html