---
title: "Intersex Activists Respond to The Vagina Monologues"
---

 <br>

### <span class="caps">ISNA</span> Kicks Off National Initiative to Educate Playgoers<br>

<br>January 7, 2002<br>

<br>For more information, contact:  
<br><p class=m2><br>Emi Koyama

  
<br>Program Assistant, Intersex Society of North America  
<br>Community Board Chair, Survivor Project  
<br></p><p class=m2><br>Web: [http://www.isna.org/events/vday][1]  
<br>Email: <emi@isna.org> (preferred)  
<br>Voicemail: (503) 288-3191 [Survivor Project]  
<br></p>

<br>Today, Intersex Society of North America (<span class="caps">ISNA</span>) kicks off V-Day <br>Challenge 2002, a national initiative that will respond to and <br>coincide (although not officially affiliated) with V-Day 2002 College <br>Campaign. Founded by the playwright Eve Ensler, V-Day plans to <br>produce her popular play &#8220;The Vagina Monologues&#8221; at approximately <br>500 colleges and universities across the country this February. <br>Members of the intersex community feel that, while the play is <br>mostly funny, insightful and empowering, some portions of it is <br>very hurtful to intersex people.<br>

<br>In particular, the play includes a &#8220;monologue&#8221; about a &#8220;wonderful <br>vagina fairy tale,&#8221; which involves a woman who was born without a <br>vagina. Apparently in an attempt to consol his daughter, the father <br>of this woman declares: &#8220;We&#8217;re gonna get you the best homemade pussy <br>in America. And when you meet your husband he&#8217;s gonna know we had it <br>made specially for him.&#8221; Aside from the fact that the idea that <br>women&#8217;s bodies need to be modified in order to make them desirable <br>to their husbands is misogynist, there is a wide disparities between <br>how the play depicts the genital cuttings in this scene (intersex <br>genital mutilation) and the genital cuttings in Africa (female <br>genital mutilation).<br>

<br>The condition in which a vagina is missing is known as <span class="caps">MRKH</span> or <br>vaginal agenesis, and is a type of intersex condition occurring in <br>approximately one in 5000 female births. Currently, the standard <br>protocol for treating intersex conditions, including <span class="caps">MRKH</span>, is to <br>surgically alter the appearance of the genitals so as to make them <br>resemble &#8220;normal&#8221; genitals, often while the patient is too young to <br>understand what is being done to them or to be able to make an <br>informed consent. In the recent years, there is a growing movement <br>by intersex people and some medical professionals to replace this <br>concealment-based medical protocol with the patient-centered one <br>that offers psychological and social interventions and honors <br>honesty and true informed consent.<br>

<br>Esther Morris, a woman with <span class="caps">MRKH</span> and the founder of <span class="caps">MRKH</span>.org, <br>states: &#8220;Being born without a vagina was not my problem. Having to <br>get one was the real problem&#8230; I want people to understand that <br>doing the right thing often does more harm than good. The standard <br>of normal that we aim for is imaginary. We alter women&#8217;s bodies when <br>attitudes need adjusting&#8230; Women shouldn&#8217;t have to endure emotional <br>and physical pain to perform one sexual act when so many options are <br>available&#8230; Identity shouldn&#8217;t be centered around body parts &#8211; <br>missing, constructed, or removed&#8230;&#8221; (&#8220;The Missing Vagina <br>Monologue,&#8221; March 2001 issue of Sojourner).<br>

<br>&#8220;Last year I went to see this play at a local university on V-Day,&#8221; <br>says Emi Koyama, the Program Assistant for Intersex Society of North <br>America. &#8220;As a long-time anti-domestic violence activist, I was <br>happy that this play was raising awareness about the extent of the <br>violence against women. But when I saw how the play trivialized my <br>own pain and turned it into a joke, I felt deeply hurt and upset. <br>The hardest part was how the roomful of audience laughed <br>hysterically to that part, and then after the play I had to walk <br>past many women I knew telling each other how empowered and <br>validated they felt. I didn&#8217;t &#8211; I felt invalidated and silenced.&#8221;<br>

<br>V-Day Challenge however is not a protest, says Koyama. &#8220;We felt that <br>it was not wise to protest the play or V-Day, because they also do <br>many good things. They empower women, raise awareness about the <br>violence against women, and contribute financially to organizations <br>that fight these violence.&#8221; Instead, the Challenge will try to work <br>with local coordinators of V-Day College Campaign to use them as an <br>opportunity to raise awareness about the experiences of intersex <br>people, and to build greater alliances between feminist <br>anti-violence activists and intersex activists. &#8220;V-Day is not just a <br>performance, but a movement &#8211; the global movement to stop violence <br>against women and girls,&#8221; Koyama continues. &#8220;As such, it needs to<br>hold itself accountable for damages it causes, however unintentional <br>that may be.&#8221;<br>

<br>Intersex Society of North America invites everyone &#8211; whether you are <br>a V-Day organizer, a feminist, a student, an intersex person, or an <br>intersex ally &#8211; to participate in the V-Day Challenge and to help <br>create an inclusive movement that will end violence against all <br>women, including women born with intersex conditions. For more <br>information about the Challenge, visit the V-Day Challenge web site <br>at <http://www.isna.org/events/vday/> or contact Emi Koyama at <br>emi@isna.org (preferred) or 503-288-3191 (voicemail belonging to <br>Survivor Project, another small non-profit organization for which <br>Koyama is a board member).<br>

<br>As an example, production crews at Portland State University Women&#8217;s <br>Resource Center have already made a commitment to support <span class="caps">ISNA</span>&#8217;s <br>effort while putting on the play: they agreed to provide <span class="caps">ISNA</span> with a <br>table at the show, put <span class="caps">ISNA</span>&#8217;s leaflet as an insert in the program, <br>and make <span class="caps">ISNA</span>&#8217;s local project, Intersex Initiative Portland (which <br>has a specific focus on domestic and sexual violence) one of the <br>beneficiaries for the event. <span class="caps">ISNA</span> looks forward to working with other <br>organizations across the country who want to make their cities as <br>intersex-friendly as they are (or will become) vagina-friendly. <br><hr size=1 noshade width=90%><br>

### How the play depicts <span class="caps">FGM</span><p class=m2><br>Female Genital mutilation has been inflicted on 80 to 100 million girls and young women. In countries where it is practiced, mostly in Africa, about two million youngsters a year can expect the knife-or the razor or a glass shard-to cut their clitoris or remove it altogether.<br></p><p class=m2><br>Short-term results include: tetanus, hemorrhages, cuts in the urethra, bladder, vaginal walls. Long-term: chronic uterine infection, increased agony and danger during child births, and early deaths.<br></p>

### How the play depicts <span class="caps">IGM</span><p class=m2><br>Bet you didn&#8217;t know, for example, that they love vaginas in Oklahoma City [&#8230;] a wonderful vagina fairy-tale occurred&#8212;that&#8217;s a 

<span class="caps">VFT</span> [&#8230;]<br></p><p class=m2><br>One girl in Oklahoma told how she had been born without a vagina, and only realized it when she was fourteen. She was playing with her girlfriend. They compared their genitals and she realized hers was different, something was wrong. She went to the gynecologist with her father, the parent she was close to, and the doctor discovered that in fact she did not have a vagina or a uterus. Her father was heartbroken, trying to repress his tears and sadness, so his daughter would not feel bad. On the way home from the doctor, in a noble attempt to comfort her, he said, &#8220;Darlin&#8217;. We&#8217;ve got an interesting situation. You were born without a vagina. But the good news is we&#8217;re gonna get you the best homemade pussy in America. And when you meet your husband he&#8217;s gonna know we had it made specially for him.&#8221; <br></p><br><br><br><br>

 [1]: /events/vday/index.html