---
title: "On the Word Hermaphrodite"
---

# On the Word Hermaphrodite

  


The word "hermaphrodite" is a stigmatizing and misleading word.  
There is growing momentum to eliminate the word "hermaphrodite"  
from medical literature and to use the word "intersex" in its  
place. While some intersex people do reclaim the word "hermaphrodite"  
with pride to reference themselves (like words such as "dyke"  
and "queer" have been reclaimed by LGBT people), it should be  
generally avoided except under specific circumstances. 

  


  
Victorian doctors believed that the gonads were the seat of "true  
sex," and thus created a system of nomenclature -- in the absence of  
any knowledge of genetics, endocrinology, or embryology -- which categorized  
people as "male pseudohermaphrodite," "female pseudohermaphrodite,"  
or "true hermaphrodite." It's time to eliminate this quaint Victorianism  
from modern medical practice.

  
  


The word "hermaphrodite" implies that a person is born with  
two sets of genitals -- one male and one female -- and this is something  
that cannot occur.

  
  


The qualifiers "male" and "female," because they  
are based only upon the gonadal histology, frequently contradict the sex  
of assignment, and thus are very misleading and disturbing for parents and  
patients.

  
  


The qualifiers "pseudo" and "true" are even more  
harmful, because they imply a sort of authenticity, or lack of same, that  
carry powerful emotional baggage.

  
  


You can learn more about the Victorian history of these labels in Alice  
Dreger's book "Hermaphrodites and the Medical Invention of Sex."  
Look for it at our bookshelf.