---
title: "Intersex in the Age of Ethics Published"
---

<br><br>

20 August 1999<br><br>

For Immediate Release<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

<span class="caps">WHAT</span><br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

Intersex in the Age of Ethics, a collection edited <br><br>

by Alice Domurat Dreger, has just been published by <br><br>

University Press Group of Hagerstown Maryland.<br><br>

http://www.upgbooks.com/page10.html<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

"Intersex in the Age of Ethics marks the first <br><br>

time an entire volume has been dedicated to the <br><br>

exploration of the ethics of intersex treatment. <br><br>

It could not be more timely; professional <br><br>

conferences, gender clinics, and the popular <br><br>

media are abuzz with the controversy over how <br><br>

medicine and society should handle intersex <br><br>

and intersexuals. The volume will provide some <br><br>

much-needed perspective. The writings <br><br>

approach the issue of intersexuality and its <br><br>

treatment from numerous perspectives, <br><br>

including the personal, ethical, clinical, legal, <br><br>

anthropological, historical, sociological, and <br><br>

philosophical.<br><br>

&#8212;Alice Domurat Dreger<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

"The range of ethical issues that arise in <br><br>

regard to the treatment of intersex infants, <br><br>

children, and adults is richly representative of <br><br>

the clinical healthcare ethics generally. By <br><br>

incorporating the perspective of patients and <br><br>

their stories in this account, however, <br><br>

Intersex in the Age of Ethics does more than <br><br>

introduce the question of healthcare ethics in <br><br>

microcosm. It also leads the reader to <br><br>

examine the effect of ethical reflection on the <br><br>

lives of patients.<br><br>

"Unlike many collections of essays, this one <br><br>

hangs together very well both for reading and <br><br>

for teaching. Intersex in the Age of Ethics is a <br><br>

model, in both senses of the word, of what <br><br>

thoughtful healthcare ethics reflection can <br><br>

accomplish. It embodies a conceptual model of <br><br>

ethical reflection that leads the reader to pose <br><br>

the right questions and to respond to them <br><br>

with patients&#8217; lives in mind. And it is a model <br><br>

in the evaluative sense&#8212;excellent, admirable, <br><br>

and deserving of imitation."<br><br>

&#8212;David T. Ozar, PhD, Loyola University of <br><br>

Chicago<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

TO <span class="caps">ORDER</span><br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

Call <A HREF="http://www.upgbooks.com/">University Publishing Group</A><br>at 800-654-8188<br><br>

(outside the US call 301-582-2200); e-mail <br><br>

orders@upgbooks.com; fax 301-582-2406. <br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

Paperback: <span class="caps">ISBN</span> 1-55572-100-1, $19.95+ship/handle<br><br>

Hard cover: <span class="caps">ISBN</span> 1-55572-125-7, $45.00+ship/handle<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

Shipping and handling $4.75 in the US; outside<br><br>

the US call for price.<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

The books can be ordered online through Barnes & <br><br>

Noble or Amazon, but because they don&#8217;t discount <span class="caps">UPG</span> <br><br>

titles, the price will be somewhat higher than retail.<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

###<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

The Intersex Society of North America (<span class="caps">ISNA</span>) <br><br>

works to create a world free of shame, secrecy,<br><br>

and genital mutilation for intersex people. For more <br><br>

information, visit our web site at <A HREF="http://www.isna.org/">http://www.isna.org</A><br>