---
title: "&#8220;First, Do No Harm&#8221; to Premiere"
---

<p>May 28, 2003  </p>

<p><span class="caps">ISNA</span>&#8217;s new documentary film, <a href="/videos/total%5C_patient%5C_care">First, Do No Harm: Total Patient Care for Intersex</a>, has been selected for the 27th San Francisco International Lesbian and Gay Film Festival! The film features a group of experts&#8212;including Cheryl Chase, <span class="caps">ISNA</span> Board member Debora Rode Hartman, and several health care professionals&#8212;talking about the trauma and shame associated with &#8220;normalizing&#8221; practices for intersex. Critiquing the current medical paradigm and exploring a more ethical and humane approach to treating intersex, &#8220;First Do No Harm&#8221; is compelling, hard-hitting, and deeply moving. It is an ideal teaching tool for students of medicine, psychology, social work, health policy, and gender studies.  </p>

<p>The prestigious festival marks the world premiere of this important film and could open doors to additional venues and markets. The film will screen on Wednesday,June 25, at 4:00 p.m. at San Francisco&#8217;s Castro Theatre, as part of a series of films grouped together under the theme &#8220;Intersex Explorations.&#8221; Other films include Susan Potter&#8217;s &#8220;Hermishly Yours,&#8221; Roz Mortimer&#8217;s &#8220;Gender Trouble,&#8221; and Shorona se Mbessakwini&#8217;s &#8220;Intersex Exposition: Full Monty.&#8221; As part of the festival&#8217;s efforts to involve communities, <span class="caps">ISNA</span> has agreed to serve as a co-presenter of the intersex series. <span class="caps">ISNA</span> Board members Thea Hillman and David Cameron will be on hand before and after the screening to introduce the film and to answer audience questions.  </p>

<p>The 27th <a href="http://www.frameline.org/">San Francisco International Lesbian and Gay Film Festival</a>, screening June 12-29 at the Castro Theatre (429 Castro Street) and the Herbst Theatre (401 Van Ness Avenue) is the oldest and largest event of its kind in the world. Tickets are available starting May 30th.</p>