---
title: "Intersex activists to speak at Creating Change 2001"
---

<br>Intersex activists will speak at several sesssions during this year&#8217;s [Creating Change][1], the largest national conference for gay, lesbian, bisexual and trans (and now intersex) activists, in Milwaukee this month.<br><br><br>

<br>Intersex activists will speak at several sesssions during this year&#8217;s [Creating Change][1], the largest national conference for gay, lesbian, bisexual and trans (and now intersex) activists, in Milwaukee this month. Here are some of the sessions that mention intersex in their descriptions:<br>

<br>* Intersex Society of North America & GenderPAC reception. Right after the opening plenary on Thursday, Nov. 8.<br>

<br>* Gender Splendor: Mobilizing a diverse movement for gender freedom and transgender/intersex/SOFFA equality (Thursday, Nov. 8).<br>

<br>* When the Words Came: Beyond binary, illustarted intersex journeys, lives and thoughts from opposite sides of the world (Friday, Nov. 9) by Mani Mitchell of Intersex Trust Aotearoa amd David Vandertie from <span class="caps">ISNA</span>.<br>

<br>* Transgender and Intersex Images in the Media (Friday, Nov. 9) by Nick Adams and Loren Javier from <span class="caps">GLAAD</span>.<br>

<br>* Intersex 101 (Saturday, Nov. 10) by Cheryl Chase, Angela Moreno Lippert, Lynnell Stephani Long, Max Beck, and Robin Mathias from <span class="caps">ISNA</span>.<br>

<br>* Reparing Broken Bridges, Building New Ones: Understanding and improving transsexual/transgender/intersex relations (Saturday, Nov. 10) by Max Beck of <span class="caps">ISNA</span> and Moonhawk River Stone of Connections Psychotherapy Associates.<br>

<br>ISNA will also hold an exhibitor&#8217;s table in front of the Regency Ballroom. Please stop by and chat us up!<br><br>

 [1]: http://www.ngltf.org/cc/