---
title: "Press Release: Intersex Activists to Speak at Connecticut Bi/Trans/Intersex Conference"
---

<br>

<br>FOR <span class="caps">IMMEDIATE</span> <span class="caps">RELEASE</span>  
<br>October 9, 2001<br>

<br>For more information contact:  
<br>Emi Koyama <<emi@isna.org>><br>

<br>Intersex activists Esther Morris, Raven Kaldera and Emi Koyama will speak at the upcoming conference on bisexual/trans/intersex coalition in New Haven, Connecticut, on Oct. 19-21. Titled &#8220;<b class=dr>Transcending Boundaries</b>,&#8221; the conference aims at bringing together bisexual, trans, and intersex people to &#8220;increase understanding, build solidarity, and encourage social and political activism.&#8221;<br>

<br><b class=dr>Esther Morris</b> is the founder of [mrkh.org][1], the network for women with Mayer Rokitansky Kuster Hauser syndrome. Her workshop will explore personal and psychological issues around <span class="caps">MRKH</span> as well as its relationship with intersexuality.<br>

<br><b class=dr>Raven Kaldera</b> is an intersex <span class="caps">FTM</span> activist, farmer, neo-pagan minister, author, and Intersex Liaison and Board of Directors member of American Boyz. His workshop is titled &#8220;Where Intersex and Transgender Meet&#8221; and is about people like himself who stand in and between both groups.<br>

<br><b class=dr>Emi Koyama</b> is the Program Assistant with Intersex Society of North America, and will be part of the closing plenary for the conference. Her lecture is titled &#8220;Interrogating the Politics of Commonality: A Possibility for Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Coalition.&#8221;<br>

<br>Other plenary speakers are Evelyn Mantilla, the first openly bisexual Connecticut State Representative, and Jamison Green, the transgender activist, writer, and columnist for PlanetOut.com.<br>

<br>For more information about the conference, please visit its web site at <http://www.transcendingboundaries.org> or call (860) 798-0705.<br>

<br>#####<br>

<br>Founded in 1993, Intersex Society is a 501&#169;(3) non-profit organization working to end secrecy, shame and unwanted genital surgeries for children born with atypical sex anatomy. For more information, please visit http://www.isna.org on the web.<br><br>

 [1]: http:mrkh.org