---
title: "COLOMBIA HIGH COURT RESTRICTS INTERSEX GENITAL MUTILATION"
---

<br><br>

<span class="caps">FOR</span> <span class="caps">IMMEDIATE</span> <span class="caps">RELEASE</span><br><br>

<span class="caps">OCT</span> 25, 1999<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

<span class="caps">COLOMBIA</span> <span class="caps">HIGH</span> <span class="caps">COURT</span> <span class="caps">RESTRICTS</span> <span class="caps">INTERSEX</span> <span class="caps">GENITAL</span> <span class="caps">MUTILATION</span><br><br>

First High Court to Address Human Rights Violation<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

<span class="caps">COLOMBIA</span> <span class="caps">HIGH</span> <span class="caps">COURT</span> <span class="caps">RESTRICTS</span> <span class="caps">INTERSEX</span> <span class="caps">GENITAL</span> <span class="caps">MUTILATION</span><br><br>

First High Court to Address Human Rights Violation<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

<span class="caps">BOGOTA</span>, <span class="caps">COLOMBIA</span> &#8212; The Constitutional Court of Colombia recently issued<br>two decisions (SU-337/99, May 12 1999 and T-551/99, Aug 2, 1999) which significantly<br>restrict the ability of parents and doctors to resort to the scalpel when<br>children are born with atypical genitals. These surgeries &#8212; also known<br>as <span class="caps">IGM</span>, or Intersex Genital Mutilation &#8212; have been widely practiced for<br>over 40 years in most industrialized countries. In the US experts estimate<br>that at least five children are cut every day. "Here in the US, doctors<br>who perform <span class="caps">IGM</span> continue to reject the voices of those harmed by the surgery.<br>Current laws do not protect us," noted Cheryl Chase of the Intersex<br>Society of North America (<span class="caps">ISNA</span>).<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

This is the first time that a high court anywhere has considered whether<br>IGM is a violation of human rights.<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

Colombia&#8217;s Constitutional Court went further than the pressing issue<br>of <span class="caps">IGM</span>. The Court recognized that intersex people are a minority which<br>enjoys the constitutional protection of the State against discrimination,<br>and that every individual has a constitutional right to define his or her<br>own sexual identity. The Court concluded both decisions with the same emphatic<br>exhortation:<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

"Intersexed people question our capacity for tolerance and constitute<br>a challenge to the acceptance of difference. Public authorities, the medical<br>community and the citizenry at large have the duty to open up a space for<br>these people who have until now been silenced [&#8230;] We all have to listen<br>to them, and not only to learn how to live with them, but also to learn<br>from them."<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

"We hope that human rights activists around the world will follow<br>the Court&#8217;s mandate," stated Sydney Levy of the International Gay and<br>Lesbian Human Rights Commission. "Mutilation is torture any way you<br>slice it."<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

The Court&#8217;s decision came after an exhaustive, year-long investigation,<br>in which it weighed arguments by doctors and parents &#8212; who insist on surgery<br>to make babies "normal" &#8212; against opposition to the practice<br>by those harmed by <span class="caps">IGM</span>, including an amicus brief by <span class="caps">ISNA</span>. "The Court<br>noted that this is not a medical decision, but a judicial and ethical decision.<br>Ethicists in the US have uniformly denounced <span class="caps">IGM</span> as unethical, but until<br>US courts act, American doctors will continue to perform <span class="caps">IGM</span> on 2,000 children<br>every year," noted Chase.<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

In addition to the Colombian Constitution, the Court also based its holding<br>on the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. According to<br>Shannon Minter, staff attorney for the National Center for Lesbian Rights,<br>"the Court recognized that children are persons entitled to human rights,<br>not simply the property of parents and/or the state. By holding that parents<br>must place the well-being and best interests of their child above social<br>prejudice, the Court affirmed the inherent dignity and worth of all children,<br>including those who are gender variant." The US is not a signatory<br>of the Convention.<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

More information on the decisions is available in "Colombia High<br>Court Limits Surgery on Intersexed Infants," by Julie Greenberg, Professor<br>of Law at Thomas Jefferson School of Law in San Diego, at http://www.isna.org/Colombia.<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

###<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

<span class="caps">ISNA</span> works to create a world free of shame, secrecy, and genital mutilation<br>for people born with atypical sex anatomy. For more information, visit<br>our web site at <A HREF="http://www.isna.org/">http://www.isna.org</A><br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

<span class="caps">IGLHRC</span>&#8217;s mission is to protect and advance the human rights of all people<br>and communities subject to discrimination or abuse on the basis of sexual<br>orientation, gender identity, or <span class="caps">HIV</span> status. <A HREF="http://www.iglhrc.org/">http://www.iglhrc.org</A>.<br><br>

&nbsp;<br><br>

<span class="caps">NCLR</span> is a lesbian, feminist, multi-cultural legal resource center dedicated<br>to creating a world in which all lesbians can live fully, without fear of<br>discrimination. <A HREF="http://www.nclrights.org/">http://www.nclrights.org</A>.<br>