---
title: "pr6-4-98"
---

# pr6-4-98

  
  


  
 Press  
Release: 4 June 1998  
  


* * *

  
  
**_Journal of Psychology & Human Sexuality_ and _Nature_  
(book review)**</P>  
  


1. _Journal of Psychology & Human Sexuality_

  
  


Meyer-Bahlburg, Heino. (1998). Gender assignment in intersexuality. _Journal  
of Psychology_  
  
_and Human Sexuality_, 10(2), 1-21.

  
  


Abstract: The prevalent policy of assignment of gender to children born  
with ambiguous genitalia has recently been questioned from both biological  
and social-constructionist perspectives. This paper comments on the debate  
from the perspective of the clinician involved in the psychosocial management  
of intersexuality. It argues for only minor changes of the policy until  
a more extensive  
  
data base is available that permits a firmly grounded revision.

  
  


Article copies available for a fee from The Haworth Document Delivery  
Service, 800-342-9678, getinfo@haworth.com.

  
  


An earlier draft of this paper was presented by the author at a meeting  
of the Society for the Scientific Study of Sexuality, San Francisco, 1995.  
That meeting was reported in "Sexual Scientists  
  
Question Treatment" in ISNA's newsletter Hermaphrodites with Attitude.  
See http://www.isna.org/HWA/Winter95-96/Winter95-96.html#anchor59692.  
  
  
&nbsp;

  
  


2. Nature (book review)

  
  


Porter, Roy. (1998). Body of evidence. _Nature_, 339, 323.

  
  


"Ignore the somewhat trendy title, which might seem to threaten  
yet another piece of pretentious postmodernism. This is a well-researched,  
sober history of a problem that Alice Dreger shows has directly affected  
more people than we might think and which shapes the sense of sexual identity  
of  
  
us all."

  
  


"Avoiding preachy judgmentalism, Dreger shows us how deeply ingrained  
are our assumptions about gender normality (sexual anatomy is destiny),  
and on how flimsy a basis they have been grounded. The book offers us all  
a lesson in self-awareness."

  
  


Roy Porter is at the Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine,  
in London.

  
  


&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;  
Top of Page&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;  
Home  
  
&nbsp;  
  
&nbsp;  
  
&nbsp;