---
title: Diamond and Sigmundson publish recommendations
---

Press Release: 18 November 1997\n\nDiamond and Sigmundson publish recommendations\n\nSex researcher Milton Diamond and psychiatrist Keith Sigmundson, whose publication last March of a follow-up which revealed that the sex reassignment of &#8220;John/Joan&#8221; had been a failure, have unleashed a new wave of controversy. The October issue of Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine published a new article by the pair, which outlines a new model of management for intersexuality. &#8220;Some of these suggestions,&#8221; note the pair, &#8220;are contrary to today&#8217;s common management procedures. . . Underlying our guidelines is the key belief that that patients themselves must be involved in any decision as to something so crucial in their lives.&#8221;\n\nThe article emphasizes openness, honesty, peer support and professional counseling, and avoidance of early cosmetic surgery. In a break with the journal&#8217;s tradition, the article closes with nearly a full page of listings for a variety of peer support groups.\n\nDiamond, Milton, and H. Keith Sigmundson. 1997. Commentary: Management of Intersexuality: Guidelines for dealing with persons with ambiguous genitalia. _Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine_ 151.\n\nDiamond, Milton, and HK Sigmundson. 1997. Sex Reassignment at Birth: A Long Term Review and Clinical Implications. _Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine_ 150:298-304. Available on <A HREF="http://www.hawaii.edu/PCSS/online_artcls/intersex/mdfnl.html">http://www.hawaii.edu/PCSS/online_artcls/intersex/mdfnl.html</A>.