---
title: "Intersex Advocates Educate Playgoers"
---

<br><b class=dr>Date:</b> January 4, 2002  
<br><b class=dr>Publication:</b> _Just Out_ (Portland-based <span class="caps">LGBT</span> newspaper)  
<br>

<br>Three intersex advocates held an educational outreach in conjunction <br>with opening night of The Vagina Monologues Dec. 27 on the sidewalk <br>in front of the Portland Center for the Performing Arts.<br>

<br>At issue is a segment of the popular play in which writer Eve Ensler <br>tells &#8220;a wonderful vagina fairy tale&#8221; she heard in Oklahoma City. <br>The monologue involves a father consoling his 14-year-old daughter, <br>who just has learned she was born without a vagina.<br>

<br>&#8220;We&#8217;re gonna get you the best homemade pussy in America,&#8221; he tells <br>her. &#8220;And when you meet your husband he&#8217;s gonna know we had it made <br>specially for him.&#8221;<br>

<br>Emi Koyama &#8211; one of only two paid intersex activists in the world &#8211; <br>calls Monologues fun and insightful but says this particular segment <br>is misleading. She helped hand out 350 fliers explaining the <br>condition, which is known as vaginal agenasis.<br>

<br>Koyama works for the Intersex Society of North America, which seeks <br>to end shame, secrecy and unwanted genital surgeries on children. <br>She notes the segment also suggests that women&#8217;s bodies are made <br>solely for husbands and that they should be altered to match what <br>men desire.<br>

<br>&#8220;Many intersex people who saw the play found this monologue &#8211; and <br>the roomful of laughter following it &#8211; hurtful if not outright <br>offensive,&#8221; Koyama says, &#8220;We went home feeling sick or in tears, <br>while all other women talked to each other endlessly about how <br>empowered they felt.&#8221;<br>

<br>According to Koyama, the goal of the outreach was not to protest The <br>Vagina Monologues but to raise awareness and visibility. Similar <br>actions have been held in Ann Arbor, Mich., and Boston.<br>

<br>&#8220;This is not just a play; this is a movement,&#8221; Koyama says. &#8220;I want <br>to make sure that it accurately reflects intersex experience.&#8221;<br>

<br>Koyama&#8217;s efforts seem to be paying off: When The Vagina Monologues <br>plays next month at Portland State University, she will be able to <br>set up an informational table and to insert the fliers into the <br>programs. Promoters also have agreed to write a letter to Ensler and <br>to donate some of the proceeds to Intersex Initiative Portland and <br>the Survivor Project.<br>

<br>For more information visit the Internet site www.isna.org.<br>