---
title: "Intersex Advocates Educate Playgoers"
---

  
<b class=dr>Date:</b> January 4, 2002  
  
<b class=dr>Publication:</b> _Just Out_ (Portland-based LGBT newspaper)  
  


  
Three intersex advocates held an educational outreach in conjunction  
with opening night of The Vagina Monologues Dec. 27 on the sidewalk  
in front of the Portland Center for the Performing Arts.  


  
At issue is a segment of the popular play in which writer Eve Ensler  
tells "a wonderful vagina fairy tale" she heard in Oklahoma City.  
The monologue involves a father consoling his 14-year-old daughter,  
who just has learned she was born without a vagina.  


  
"We're gonna get you the best homemade pussy in America," he tells  
her. "And when you meet your husband he's gonna know we had it made  
specially for him."  


  
Emi Koyama - one of only two paid intersex activists in the world -  
calls Monologues fun and insightful but says this particular segment  
is misleading. She helped hand out 350 fliers explaining the  
condition, which is known as vaginal agenasis.  


  
Koyama works for the Intersex Society of North America, which seeks  
to end shame, secrecy and unwanted genital surgeries on children.  
She notes the segment also suggests that women's bodies are made  
solely for husbands and that they should be altered to match what  
men desire.  


  
"Many intersex people who saw the play found this monologue - and  
the roomful of laughter following it - hurtful if not outright  
offensive," Koyama says, "We went home feeling sick or in tears,  
while all other women talked to each other endlessly about how  
empowered they felt."  


  
According to Koyama, the goal of the outreach was not to protest The  
Vagina Monologues but to raise awareness and visibility. Similar  
actions have been held in Ann Arbor, Mich., and Boston.  


  
"This is not just a play; this is a movement," Koyama says. "I want  
to make sure that it accurately reflects intersex experience."  


  
Koyama's efforts seem to be paying off: When The Vagina Monologues  
plays next month at Portland State University, she will be able to  
set up an informational table and to insert the fliers into the  
programs. Promoters also have agreed to write a letter to Ensler and  
to donate some of the proceeds to Intersex Initiative Portland and  
the Survivor Project.  


  
For more information visit the Internet site www.isna.org.