---
title: "ISNA to Participate\n    in Research on Quality of Life Issues, Hormone Disruptor Debate"
---

<br> 

Intersex Society of North America (<span class="caps">ISNA</span>)  
<br> Press Release<br> 

<span class="caps">INTERSEX</span> <span class="caps">SOCIETY</span> OF <span class="caps">NORTH</span> <span class="caps">AMERICA</span> to Participate in Research on Quality<br> of Life Issues, Hormone Disruptor Debate<br> 

For Immediate Release: September 30, 2003<br> 

For additional information, contact the <span class="caps">ISNA</span> Office at 206-633-6077.<br> 

Seattle &#8211; The Intersex Society of North America announced today that it<br> would begin working in an advisory capacity with university researchers to<br> develop a research plan for quality of life studies for people with intersex<br> conditions.<br> 

Board Chair Thea Hillman stated, "This is an important step for us.<br> For too long, scientists and doctors have studied intersex without the active<br> and informed involvement of people with intersex. It&#8217;s time for those<br> with the greatest stake&#8212;people with intersex&#8212;to be able to help<br> design research that meets our needs."<br> 

Intersex activists and health care professionals have long asserted the<br> lack of useful data about people with intersex conditions, particularly in<br> regard to treatment. The few studies that have been done have been mainly<br> focused on &#8220;physical correctness&#8221; or gender identity as a measure<br> of surgical success. Largely missing from this research have been questions<br> about quality of life; sexual function and relationship issues; family dynamics,<br> especially for children and young adults; and the kinds of psychosocial resources<br> needed by people with intersex conditions.<br> 

In the same statement, <span class="caps">ISNA</span> also clarified its role in a project examining<br> the relationship between hormone (or endocrine) disruptors and intersex conditions.<br> Monica J. Casper, Ph.D., Executive Director, stated that the point of the<br> organization&#8217;s collaboration with Birth Defect Research for Children, Inc.,<br> was not to engage in original scientific research on the causes of intersex,<br> but rather to conduct a literature review assessing what is being said and<br> written in the scientific community and the media about the link between<br> toxins and intersex conditions. <br> 

Casper stated that feedback from the intersex community has been very helpful<br> in clarifying <span class="caps">ISNA</span>&#8217;s role. She remarked, "In working with <span class="caps">BDRC</span> on this<br> project, we want to be able to take an informed position on scientific developments<br> that have major implications for people with intersex and their families.<br> Currently, research on endocrine disruptors is proceeding with zero input<br> from the intersex community. This project, shaped by our mission to end shame<br> and secrecy and unwanted surgeries, hopes to remedy that." <br>