---
title: "pr10-21-98.htm"
---

<br>21 October 1998<br>  
San Francisco<br>  
&nbsp;<br>

<span class="caps">CONTROVERSY</span> <span class="caps">OVER</span> <span class="caps">GENITAL</span> <span class="caps">SURGERIES</span> <span class="caps">HEATS</span> UP AT<br>  
<span class="caps">ANNUAL</span> <span class="caps">PEDIATRICS</span> <span class="caps">CONFERENCE</span><br>

Noted sex researcher Milton Diamond, in an invited lecture<br>  
last Saturday, told the American Academy of Pediatrics that<br>  
the time has come to instate&nbsp; a general moratorium on<br>  
genital surgeries and sex reassignments performed on<br>  
intersex children without their consent.<br>

&#8220;No large scale or even small scale study shows that &#8216;normalizing<br>  
surgery&#8217; does more good than harm,&#8221; the University of Hawaii<br>  
researcher told the packed room. Though they have been performed<br>  
for more than 40 years, the procedures remain experimental,<br>  
and without data it is impossible for parents to give informed<br>  
consent on their children&#8217;s behalf, he observed.<br>

Earlier presentations by surgeons served to underscore Diamond&#8217;s<br>  
charges. Surgeon Laurence Baskin of the University of California<br>  
at San Francisco presented three dimensional images of fetal<br>  
clitoral neuroanatomy. Though surgeons attempting to reduce<br>  
the clitorises of intersex infants have claimed that the<br>  
nerves are highly localized in bundles at the 11:00 and 1:00<br>  
positions, making possible preservation of sensation and hopefully<br>  
sexual function, Baskin&#8217;s images demonstrated that the<br>  
innervation is circumferentially distributed. Questioned<br>  
about what this means for the future sexual function of<br>  
girls subjected to clitoral surgery as infants,<br>  
Baskin repeatedly emphasized, &#8220;We have **no** data.&#8221;<br>

Diamond also called for a concerted effort to be made to undo<br>  
the effects of past physician deception. He cited not only the<br>  
direct harm inflicted upon patients by deception, but also indirect<br>  
effects. A policy of deception undermines relations of trust<br>  
and confidence between patient and provider and conveys the clear<br>  
message that intersexuality is &#8220;unspeakably shameful in the minds<br>  
of parents and physicians.&#8221; And as intersexuality becomes more widely<br>  
known,&nbsp; not only intersexuals but the community at large learns<br>  
that &#8220;doctors choreography familial mendacity and dysfunction.&#8221;<br>  
&nbsp;<br>