---
title: "Press Release: ISNA Intern to Present Home-Coming Reports in Portland"
---

<br>FOR <span class="caps">IMMEDIATE</span> <span class="caps">RELEASE</span>  
<br>August 16, 2001<br>

<br>For more information contact:  
<br>Emi Koyama <<emi@isna.org>><br>

<br>Summer 2001 <span class="caps">ISNA</span> Intern Emi Koyama will return to Portland, her<br>home town, and give two public presentations about intersex<br>movement and her experience working at Intersex Society of North<br>America. Here are date, time and location of these presentations<br>as well as descriptions:<br>

<br>1) Homophobia and the Medical Abuse of Intersex Children.  
<br>Aug. 20 at noon; Basic Rights Oregon (3430 SE Belmont).<br>

<br>> Every day, five intersex children in the United States go  
<br>> through invasive and medically unnecessary cosmetic surgeries  
<br>> on their genitals. That is more than 20 children a year in  
<br>> Oregon alone. This lunch hour presentation will combine a  
<br>> short (10 min.) film, lecture and discussion to explore the  
<br>> role homophobia, biphobia and transphobia played in  
<br>> rationalizing such a medical atrocity, and what <span class="caps">LGBT</span>  
<br>> activists can do to help end it. This is a brown bag lunch  
<br>> seminar for <span class="caps">LGBT</span> activists, sponsored by Basic Rights Oregon.  
<br>

<br>2) Intersex Activism: A Report from the Frontline.  
<br>Aug. 23 at 7 pm; In Other Words (3734 SE Hawthorne).<br>

<br>> A public presentation about the latest developments in the  
<br>> intersex movement. This is a homecoming report by Emi, in  
<br>> which she will talk about never-told-before stories from  
<br>> her tenure as the Activist-in-Residence at Intersex Society  
<br>> of North America. Come and find out what intersex activism  
<br>> is about and where it is going from here. This event is  
<br>> sponsored by Survivor Project and Intersex Society of North  
<br>> America.<br>

<br>The latter event is also a kick-off for the statewide campaign to  
<br>end shame, secrecy and unwanted and unnecessary medical treatments  
<br>on intersex children in Oregon. The campaign is led by Survivor  
<br>Project, the Portland-based non-profit organization dedicated to  
<br>addressing the needs of intersex and trans survivors of abuse, and  
<br>is aimed at building a grass-roots awareness and support for  
<br>intersex activism. For more information about Survivor Project,  
<br>please visit its web site at <http://www.survivorproject.org/>  
<br>

<br>#####<br>

<br>Founded in 1993, Intersex Society is a 501&#169;(3) non-profit<br>organization working to end secrecy, shame and unwanted genital<br>surgeries for children born with atypical sex anatomy. For more<br>information, please visit http://www.isna.org on the web.<br>