---
title: "Press Release: Intersex Activist to Speak at Gay Pride in Montr&eacute;al"
---

<br>FOR <span class="caps">IMMEDIATE</span> <span class="caps">RELEASE</span>  
  
<br>July 25, 2001  
<br>Contact: Curtis Hinkle <chinkle233@aol.com>  
<br>Centre Communautaire des Gais et Lesbiennes de Montr&eacute;al <info@ccglm.qc.ca><br><p class=m2><br>Andr&eacute Fiset will be hosting Curtis Hinkle during Gay Pride Week in Montreal. Curtis, an intersex activist and feminist, will give a series of 4 lectures, 2 in English and 2 in French. The general public is invited. Special lectures will be given for specialists dealing with intersex.<br></p><p class=m2><br>Curtis is the first intersex person to serve at the state level of 

<span class="caps">NOW</span>, the largest feminist organization in the U. S.<br></p><p class=m2><br>The lectures will be held at the Centre Communautaire des Gais et Lesbiennes de Montr&eacute;al the 1st and 2nd of August. The lectures in English will be presented August 1 at 7:00 and 8:30 pm in hall 130; lectures in French will be on August 2 at 7:00 and 8:30 pm in the same location. The address of the Centre is 2075 Plessis St. at the corner of Ontario.<br></p><p class=m2><br>If you are interested in intersex rights, do not hesitate to call or write the Centre for more information.<br></p><p class=m2><br>The <span class="caps">CCGLM</span> is open Monday though Friday  
<br>from 09h00 to 12h00 and from 13h00 to 17h00  
<br>Telephone: (514) 528-8424  
<br>Fax: (514) 528-9708<br></p><p class=m2><br>You can also write to:  
<br>CCGLM  
<br>C.P. 476, succursale &#8220;C&#8221;  
<br>Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;abec  
<br>H2L 4K4<br></p><p class=m2><br>Or by e-mail at: info@ccglm.qc.ca<br></p><p class=m2><br>You can reach Curtis directly at: chinkle233@aol.com<br></p><p class=m2><br>###<br></p><p class=m2><br>Founded in 1993, Intersex Society is a 501&#169;(3) non-profit <br>organization working to end secrecy, shame and unwanted genital <br>surgeries for children born with atypical sex anatomy. For more <br>information, please visit http://www.isna.org on the web.<br></p><br>