---
title: "Intersex Studies to be Offered at Portland State University"
---

 <br>Syllabus Presented at Feb. 25 Open House<br>

<br>February 4, 2002<br>

<br><b class=dr>Contact:</b> Emi Koyama, <emi@isna.org><br>

<br>During spring 2002 term starting in April, Emi Koyama, the Program <br>Assistant for Intersex Society of North America, will teach the <br>course &#8220;Intersexuality: An Interdisciplinary Exploration&#8221; at <br>Portland State University through its student-run Chiron program. <br>This course is believed to be the first of its kind as a for-credit, <br>full-length course about intersexuality.<br>

<br>The course consists of three main parts: First, students will learn <br>biological and medical facts about intersexuality and the current <br>treatment model toward intersex conditions. Second, they will <br>discuss issues raised by intersex activists in the past decade and <br>about the ongoing debate within medicine regarding reforming <br>intersex treatment. Lastly, students will learn to critique medical, <br>academic and popular culture materials produced about intersex. The <br>course mixes lecture, discussion, film, as well as guest speakers. <br>The registration is limited in size and will begin later this month.<br>

<br>To familiarize potential students with the topic and get them <br>interested in learning more about it by taking the course, Koyama <br>will hold an &#8220;unofficial open house&#8221; on <span class="caps">PSU</span> campus in which she will <br>present the syllabus for the course and answer questions about the <br>course and about intersex issues in general. Co-sponsored by <span class="caps">PSU</span> <br>Women&#8217;s Resource Center, the open house will be held at Smith <br>Memorial Center room 294 on February 25 at 4:00 pm. The syllabus is <br>also avaialble via email by request in case someone cannot make the <br>open house but is interested in learning more about the course.<br>

<br>Intersex Society of North America is a 501&#169;(3) non-profit <br>organization dedicated to ending shame, secrecy and unwanted genital <br>surgeries on intersex children. For more information about <span class="caps">ISNA</span>, <br>visit http://www.isna.org on the web.<br><br><br>