---
title: "Calling All Intersex Activists, Supporters,    and Friends:  Help Plan the &quot;Intersex Awareness Day&quot; for 2004 and"
---

We are forming a consortium to create an annual day of grass-roots<br> action to end shame, secrecy and unwanted genital cosmetic surgeries on intersex<br> children, and we want your input! We are hoping to create a "day of<br> action" similar to Take Back the Night, National Coming Out Day, or<br> International Women&#8217;s Day in that it will focus on grass-roots action organized<br> by local activists. The event will be national&#8212;perhaps even international<br> in scope&#8212;but will be marked, celebrated, witnessed, and honored in<br> different ways by diverse groups at a local level.<br> 

The "day" does not belong to any particular group, but it is for<br> all of us who are concerned about the treatment of intersex children in our<br> society. Through the consortium, we will come up with the name, the date,<br> and the mission statement for the event, within which local organizers are<br> encouraged to put on creative activities that will raise awareness of intersex<br> issues. <br> 

This is the perfect opportunity for people concerned about intersex issues<br> to get involved! The consortium is open to everyone, and communicates via<br> an electronic mailing list. To join the discussion or read previous comments,<br> visit <http://www.intersex-awareness-day.org/modules/news/> <br> 

This project is endorsed (but not controlled) jointly by Intersex Society<br> of North America, Bodies Like Ours, and Intersex Initiative Portland.