---
title: 2004 LGBTI Health Summit
---

<span class="caps">ISNA</span> board member Esther Morris Leidolf and Judy Bradford will present &#8220;Integrating Mental Health Services within Intersex Patient Care&#8221; at the 2004 <span class="caps">LGBTI</span> Health Summit in Cambridge.\n\nISNA Executive Director Cheryl Chase will present &#8220;What <span class="caps">LGBTI</span> Health Activists Need to Know (& May Mistakenly Think They Know) About Intersex&#8221;.\n\nISNA is not and never has been in favor of three sexes, no sexes, or eliminating gender&#8212;but many mistakenly believe that these are part of <span class="caps">ISNA</span>&#8217;s agenda. This workshop will present <span class="caps">ISNA</span>&#8217;s actual agenda, which includes the key points that intersexuality is basically a problem of stigma and trauma, not gender; that parents&#8217; distress must not be treated by surgery on the child; that professional mental health care is essential; that honest, complete disclosure is good medicine; and that all children should be assigned as boy or girl, without early surgery. \n\nThe 2004 <span class="caps">LGBTI</span> Health Summit will be held Wednesday August 25 through Sunday August 29, 2004, at the Royal Sonesta Hotel, in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Information regarding hotel accommodations and registration can be found on our web site: <a href="http://www.healthsummit2004.org" target="_blank">www.healthsummit2004.org</a>. Hotel reservations are limited and available on a first come first serve basis. Additional questions can be referred to Summit Coordinator <a href="http://www.healthsummit2004.org/contact.htm" target="_blank">contact Thomas Lewis</a>, Summit Coordinator, at 617.482.9485.\n\nLesbians, gay men, bisexuals, transgender and intersex (<span class="caps">LGBTI</span>) persons will come together at the 2004 <span class="caps">LGBTI</span> Health Summit to create a unique community for the purpose of exploring, expanding and exploding existing notions of what makes us healthy as individuals and as communities. The organizing collective is committed to ensuring that this is a grassroots effort, creating a welcoming environment for all persons, regardless of size, shape, age, race, gender, faith, sexual expression, or other identifiers. We ask everyone who may attend the summit to think about the issues, challenges, successes and experiences that they would like to share or hear about. Health encompasses many realms: physical, spiritual, emotional, social, economic, vocational and many other aspects of our how we heal each other and ourselves. It also includes taking responsibility for ourselves, our loved ones, our community and advocating for social parity. Everything from innovative research to community programs to grassroots organizing shapes our health.