---
title: "E-News"
---

**Hello!** You&#8217;re receiving this message because sometime in the last few months you requested to get news updates from the Intersex Society of North America (<span class="caps">ISNA</span>).<br><br>First off, we want you to know that we now have our e-news system up and running and you should soon be receiving updates about once per month. Always feel free to visit our website [www.isna.org][1], widely considered the premiere source worldwide for information about intersex.<br><br>Second, good news: In the months while you weren&#8217;t hearing from us, we were busy transforming <span class="caps">ISNA</span> into a fleet, highly sustainable model. The key feature of this plan has been the elimination of a traditional office space and the move to a state-of-the-art virtual system which allows us to be decentralized.<br><br>Although <span class="caps">ISNA</span> looks to the outside world a lot like it did in December of 2003, in fact <span class="caps">ISNA</span> is now a vastly [more efficient (and therefore more effective) organization][2]. Expert volunteers around the U.S. now keep our website current, answer inquiries, and carry out our programming. And our website is much more accessible to the average user. (In fact, you can see that dozens of people are using it at any given moment day or nght if you look just down the homepage on the right side.)<br><br>These structural changes were necessary to keep <span class="caps">ISNA</span> alive in these economically challenging times for non-profits, but they have also been extremely satisfying to those of us who live on a daily basis with <span class="caps">ISNA</span>. The changes have allowed us to spend less of our time frantically trying to raise money, and more of our time doing what we came for&#8212;changing the world for the better.<br><br>So what have we been doing lately to build a world free of shame, secrecy, and unwanted genital surgeries for people born with atypical reproductive anatomies? **Lots!** Including:<br><br>* Educating medical professionals and lay people through distribution of our new film, [The Child with an Intersex Condition: Total Patient Care][3] and our now-classic film, [Hermaphrodites Speak!][4]* Developing [tools for parents][5]* [Collaborating with medical professionals][6] on improved care for families dealing with intersex<br>* [Conducting a study][7] into what medical students are now taught about intersex<br>* [Tracking important changes in medical attitudes][8]* Providing via our website the real stories of what&#8217;s happened to [people with intersex conditions][9] and to [their parents][10]* Supporting the San Francisco Human Rights Commission in their [investigation into intersex][11] [so much more][12] look forward to keeping you updated as we do our work. In the meantime, please do consider [donating to support our efforts][13]. The more you donate, the more we can advance our mission: building a world free of shame, secrecy, and unwanted genital surgeries for people born with atypical reproductive anatomeis. Thank you!<br><br>Cheryl Chase, Executive Director<br>Alice Dreger, Chair of the Board of Directors

 [1]: http://www.isna.org
 [2]: /node/view/594
 [3]: /totalpatientcare
 [4]: /hermaphroditesspeak%5Cn
 [5]: /node/view/631%5Cn
 [6]: /about/medicalboard
 [7]: /merisignup
 [8]: /node/view/570%5Cn
 [9]: /missingvagina
 [10]: /node/view/633%5Cn
 [11]: /node/view/606%5Cn%5CnAnd
 [12]: /accomplishments/2004.%5Cn%5CnWe
 [13]: http://www.isna.org/donate