---
title: "Bangor ME: Vickie Boisseau presentation"
---

Intersex activist/speaker Vickie Boisseau will be in Bangor, Maine on Thursday, October 21st and Friday, October 22nd to give several presentations on intersex issues to a variety of medical, mental health, and public organizations.<br><br>On Friday evening, October 22nd, from 7:00 &#8211; 9:00 pm, there will be a private dinner for Vickie and any intersex folks from Maine who would like to gather to chat, eat, hob-nob, and meet other IS people from the area. The dinner will be at the home of Jean Vermette in Bangor. For more information, directions, etc. you can contact Jean by email at megress@tds.net or by phone at 207-862-2063.<br><br>Ms. Boisseau is a speaker/trainer for SpeakOut Boston, a Boston based <span class="caps">GBLTI</span> Speakers bureau, and is co-founder of The Annual Intersex Days of Awareness at the University of Montana (an educational event which has now gone &#8216;national&#8217;).<br><br>She is on the Member Services & Steering Committee of the &#8220;Massachusetts Transgender Political Coalition&#8221; and serves as mentor and facilitator for several transgender and intersex support organizations (You Are Not Alone &#8211; Worcester; Oxford Teen Club; and Parents of Intersexed Children).<br><br>She has been interviewed in numerous media outlets, and is also the president and founder of TransVision Hikers Club (a <span class="caps">GBLTIQ</span> friendly hikers club).<br><br>Some of her past speaking engagements and presentations have been at:<br><br>University of Montana<br>Welsley College<br>Planned Parenthood of Boston<br>Attleboro High School<br>&#8220;<span class="caps">LGBTI</span> Health Summit 2004&#8221; in Cambridge, Ma.<br>Day of Silence at the State House in Boston, Ma.<br>Day of Rememberence Event in Boston, Ma.<br>and numerous churches and congregations throughout Massachusetts<br>