---
title: "AAAS Symposium Defining Male and Female: Biology and the Law"
---

<p><span class="caps">PRESS</span> <span class="caps">RELEASE</span>  </p>

<p><a href="http://php.aaas.org/meetings/MPE_01.php#487">Defining Male and Female: Biology and the Law</a>  </p>

<p>The National Organization of Gay &amp; Lesbian Scientists and Technical Professionals, Inc. (<span class="caps">NOGLSTP</span>) is proud to present a three hour symposium entitled Defining Male and Female: Biology and the Law during the American Association for the Advancement of Science (<span class="caps">AAAS</span>) Annual Meeting. The event is scheduled from 8 to 11am on Saturday, February 19th, 2005 in Washington DC.  </p>

<p>This symposium will bring together experts in the fields of medicine, biology, law, ethics, community relations, and politics to discuss the implications surrounding the complexity and variability in defining the contexts of male and female.  </p>

<p>The Speaker panel will include:  </p>

<p>\*Eric Vilain, M.D., Ph.D.\*  <br />
Associate Professor of Human Genetics, Pediatrics and Urology  <br />
Chief, Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics  <br />
Director, Laboratory of Sexual Medicine, Department of Urology  <br />
David Geffen School of Medicine at <span class="caps">UCLA</span>  <br />
Intersexualities  </p>

<p>\*William G. Reiner M.D.\*  <br />
Associate Professor  <br />
Director, Psychosexual Development Clinic (Child and Adolescent)  <br />
Department of Urology, Division of Pediatric Urology  <br />
Department of Psychiatry, Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry  <br />
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center  </p>


<p>\*Mara Keisling\*  <br />
National Center for Transgender Equality  <br />
Laws: Protections, prohibitions, and their affect on communities.  </p>

<p>\*Susan J. Becker\*  <br />
Professor  <br />
Cleveland-Marshall College of Law  <br />
Cleveland State University  <br />
The Legal Challenges of Sexual Identity  </p>

<p>Moderator  <br />
\*Stephanie J. Bird, PhD\*  <br />
Special Assistant to the Vice President for Research  <br />
Massachusetts Institute of Technology  </p>

<p>There will be a public discussion following the speaker presentations. This dialogue will include James P. McGovern, U.S. House of Representatives (D-MA), as a special guest discussant.  </p>

<p>For background and further information including the symposium synopsis and speaker abstracts can be found at the following Internet address:  </p>


<p><a href="http://www.noglstp.org"><span class="caps">NOGLSTP</span></a> is a national organization of gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender people (and their advocates) employed or interested in scientific or high technology fields. <span class="caps">NOGLSTP</span>&#8217;s goals include dialogue with professional organizations, disseminating information, improving our members employment and professional environment, opposing anti-queer discrimination and stereotypes, educating the queer, scientific, and general communities, and fostering inter-city contacts among our members. We are a non-profit educational organization under <span class="caps">IRS</span> section 501&#169;(3), and are an affiliate of the <a href="http://www.aaas.org/">American Association for the Advancement of Science</a>.  </p>

<p><span class="caps">CONTACT</span>:  <br />
Rochelle Diamond, Chair, <span class="caps">NOGLSTP</span>  <br />
(626) 484-7022</p>