---
title: "Help Educate Eve Ensler in Boston!"
---

Date: Sat, 17 Mar 2001 17:36:14 -0500<br>To: &#8220;<span class="caps">ISNA</span> News (multiple recipients in Boston area)&#8221; <news@isna.org><br>From: Cheryl Chase <cchase@isna.org><br>Subject: Eve Ensler in Boston: Help us educate her!<br><br><br>Hi, All you <span class="caps">ISNA</span> correspondents in Greater Boston area!<br><br><br>Please help us to educate Eve Ensler! She&#8217;s coming to Boston this month!<br><br>You&#8217;ve probably heard of The Vagina Monologues. You may not know that<br>the book and play promotes the idea that clitorectomy occurs in<br>Africa, or perhaps a long time ago in America, but not here and now<br>(page 66 in the V-Day edition). There&#8217;s also a dreadful line in the<br>play, in which a father tells his daughter, who was born without a<br>vagina:<br><br>bq. We&#8217;re gonna get you the best home made pussy in America.<br>And when you meet your husband, he&#8217;ll know we had it made just for him! (page 99).<br><br>Aside from the implication that a woman&#8217;s body should be<br>surgically altered purely for the benefit of a hypothetical future<br>husband, this passage ignores the realities of what happens to a girl<br>when doctors decide to &#8220;fix&#8221; her vagina.<br><br><br>First, please take a moment to learn about these realities, in the<br>following personal narratives by Marguerite Morris and Angela Moreno:<br><br><br>Morris, Marguerite. 2001. The Missing Vagina Monologue. Sojourner,<br>March. Available from http://www.isna.org/library/missingvagina.html.<br><br><br>Moreno, Angela. 1999. In Amerika They Call Us Hermaphrodites. In<br>Intersex in the Age of Ethics, edited by A. D. Dreger. Hagerstown,<br>MD: University Publishing Group. Available from<br>http://www.libidomag.com/nakedbrunch/archive/hermaphrodites.html.<br><br>Next, you should know that Boston is a major center for genital<br>surgeries on intersex infants, and that Eve Ensler will appear later<br>this week at an event where audience feedback is encouraged (details<br>below). Please go to this event, and raise the issue of genital<br>mutilation! Every performance of The Vagina Monologues contributes to<br>the invisibility of <span class="caps">IGM</span> (Intersex Genital Mutilation), and makes it<br>that much harder to stop.<br><br><br>If you are going to see The Vagina Monologues, print one of the above<br>articles (or pick up the issue of Sojourner) and give it to the<br>person behind you in line!<br><br><br>If you belong to an online activist community, forward this email to<br>them, or point them to <span class="caps">ISNA</span>&#8217;s website (which has a news story on the<br>front page about The Vagina Monologues).<br><br><br>Yours Truly,<br><br><br>Cheryl<br><br><br>Cheryl Chase<br>Intersex Society of North America<br>http://www.isna.org<br><br>>A conversation with Eve Ensler hosted by Carol Gilligan:<br>>Carol and Eve will discuss <span class="caps">THE</span> <span class="caps">VAGINA</span> <span class="caps">MONOLOGUES</span>, the V-<span class="caps">DAY</span> <span class="caps">MOVEMENT</span>,<br>>and the general state of women&#8217;s <span class="caps">VAGINAS</span>.<br>><br>>Monday, March 26 @ 7pm &#8212; <span class="caps">FREE</span>!<br>>Simmons College Alumnae Hall (321 Brookline Ave., Boston)<br>><br>>Even Ensler, the creator of The Vagina Monologues, the theatrical<br>>phenomenon that&#8217;s changed women&#8217;s language, lives and love for our<br>>bodies.<br>>Carol Gilligan is a groundbreaking psychologist and author of In a<br>>Different Voice, Between Voice and Silence and many other works.<br>><br>>Audience feedback will be encouraged!<br>><br><br><br>