---
title: "pr5-22-98"
---

# pr5-22-98

  
  


  
Press  
Release:&nbsp; 22 May 1998&nbsp; 

* * *

  
  
_Hermaphrodites and the Medical Invention of Sex_  
  
  
by Alice Domurat Dreger  
  
Harvard University Press, May 1998  
  
Hardcover, 320 pages</P>  
  


Alice Dreger, Assistant Professor of Science and Technology Studies at  
Michigan State University and adjunct faculty at the Center for Ethics and  
Humanities in the Life Sciences, brings us this study of how and why medical  
and scientific men have construed sex, gender, and sexuality as they  
  
have. A 36 page long epilogue contains narratives of intersexuals treated  
according to the still-standard medical protocols developed in the 1950s  
and calls for change: "Surely, ...it will be familiarity rather than  
knowlege that finally takes away [intersexuals'] supposed 'strangeness.'"

  
  


From Dreger's Introduction:

  
  


I hope the reader will use the history that follows to think about many  
broader and related issues. In [this research] I have learned not only about  
the history of biology, medicine, unusual bodies, and the history of the  
unexpected and changing answers to [the question: How do you know if you're  
a boy or a girl]. I have also learned about culture, about technology and  
language, about what the body could mean, does mean, and perhaps should  
mean, in the life of the person. ...I have learned about how and why it  
is that scientists and doctors work to mediate the relationships between  
our bodies and ourselves. I have also learned much about why it is we often  
look to scientists and medical doctors to read or even to alter our bodies.

  
  


I [now] realize how complicated life can be if one has a body or a being  
that stands out from  
  
the rest. And do not we all? Surely in some way every one of us is like  
a hermaphrodite, a being  
  
or a body that won't quite fit the boundaries. So I do not think of this  
intellectual journey only  
  
as a detailed history of sex, gender, and sexuality. I think of it as an  
exploration of what it means  
  
to have a body and a being in this day and age.

  
  


List: $35.00  
  
Dimensions (in inches): 1.00 x 9.53 x 6.47  
  
ISBN: 0674089278

  
  


Note: This book was formerly cited as "But My Dear Woman, You Are  
a Man."

  
  


Visit our Bookshelf page&nbsp; to order  
(in association with amazon.com)

  
  


Back to Top  
  
&nbsp;