---
title: "pr11-15-98"
---

# pr11-15-98

  
 Press  
Release: 15 November 1997  
  
  
&nbsp;  
  


Intersex discrimination permissable under law according  
to Pennsylvania court  
  


It has been brought to our attention that the United States District  
Court, E.D. Pennsylvania, is on record with a finding that discrimination  
on the basis of a history of genital plastic surgery for an intersex condition  
is permissible under the law. Note that the court did not make any judgment  
  
about whether or not discrimination actually occurred in this case;  
rather it found that, even assuming that discrimination alleged by plaintiff  
had occurred, she is not entitled to relief under the law.  
  


Below, some excerpts from 660 F. Supp. 176 (E.D.Pa 1987):  
  


Worker brought action claiming employer discriminated against her based  
on sex in violation of the Pennsylvania Human Rights Act by failing to  
promote worker and terminating her solely because her employer learned  
worker had undergone surgery to correct her hermaphroditic condition prior  
to working for employer. Employer moved for summary judgment. The District  
Court, O'Neill, J., held that Pennsylvania Supreme Court would find that  
discrimination on basis of gender-corrective surgery did not constitute  
discrimination on basis of sex under PHRA.  
  


The plain meaning of the term "sex", as it is used in the statute, would  
encompass discrimination against women because of their status as females  
and discrimination against males because of their status as males.  
  


I am further persuaded that the Supreme Court, if presented with the  
issue, would not include plaintiff within the language of the PHRA, by  
the established caselaw under Title VII.  
  
&nbsp;  
  
&nbsp;