---
title: "Kim Saviano at 4th Forum on Perinatal/Neonatal Ethical issues"
---

<p>There is apparently no website for this, so below is a transcript of the brochure. Intersex presentations are on the last day.  </p>

<p>4th Forum on Perinatal/Neonatal Ethical issues  <br />
Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday  <br />
May 11, 12, and 13, 2005  </p>

<p>Sponsored by Memorial Hospital  <br />
Colorado Springs, Colorado  </p>

<p>For More Information  <br />
Call (719) 365-6850  </p>

<p>Antlers Hilton Colorado Springs Hotel  <br />
Colorado Springs, CO  </p>

<span class="caps">COURSE</span> <span class="caps">OBJECTIVES</span>  
At the completion of this conference, the participant should be able to:  
<ul>
	<li>Describe the components of an effective newborn screening system.</li>
	<li>Discuss some of the controversies surrounding implementation of expanded newborn screening.</li>
	<li>Describe the spectrum of technologies that are employed in newborn screening.</li>
	<li>Explain the clinical significance of expanded screening in newborns.</li>
	<li>Ethical and Policy Issues of expanded Newborn screening</li>
	<li>Identify the different screening and testing options offered to pregnant women/couples.</li>
	<li>Discuss the ethical issues associated with various decisions regarding genetic screening.</li>
	<li>Discuss whether egg freezing, preimplanation genetic diagnosis and cloning represents scientific progress or an ethical dilemma.</li>
	<li>Identify ways science/medicine harmonize with law.</li>
	<li>Discuss the way in which values are transmitted genetically, culturally, and legally.</li>
	<li>Analyze the future implications of sex assignment in a newborn with ambiguous genitalia.</li>
	<li>Explain the benefits and risks of prenatal surgery.</li>
	<li>Discuss communication strategies when reviewing the results of prenatal testing with anxious parents.</li>
	<li>Identify ways in which providers can optimize the informed consent process for treatments in the <span class="caps">NICU</span>.</li>
	<li>Identify potential parental reactions to withdrawing/withholding treatment in the <span class="caps">NICU</span>.</li>
	<li>Define gestational age range and birth weight range at which survival is possible and at which survival is more likely that non-survival.</li>
	<li>Describe trends in thresholds of viability in regard to changing perinatal practices.</li>
	<li>Delineate lethal congenital anomalies from non-lethal malformations with a probability of profound neurodevelopmental effects or markedly shortened lifespan.</li>
</ul>

<p><span class="caps">WHO</span> <span class="caps">SHOULD</span> <span class="caps">ATTEND</span>  <br />
This conference will be of interst to professionals in the fields of medicine, nursing, law, medical social work, education, spiritual education, and insurance. It will also be of interest to <span class="caps">NICU</span> graduates and their families.  </p>

<p><span class="caps">CONTINUING</span> <span class="caps">EDUCATION</span> <span class="caps">CREDITS</span>  <br />
Memorial Hospital is accredited by the Colorado Medical Society to provide continuing medical education for physicians. Memorial Hospital designates this continuing medical education activity for a maximum of 20.4 Category 1 credits towards the <span class="caps">AMA</span> Physician&#8217;s Recognition Award. Each physician should claim only those hours of credit actually spent in educational activity.  </p>

<p>24.5 Nursing Contact hours. Memorial Hospital is an approved provider of continuing education by the Colorado Nurses Association, an accredited approver by the American Nurses Credentialing Center&#8217;s Commission on Accreditation. Provider #MEH-0204. Expiration date: 02/28/07. In unable to attend all three days, contact hours will be adjusted.  </p>

<p><span class="caps">ABOUT</span> <span class="caps">COLORADO</span> <span class="caps">SPRINGS</span> <span class="caps">CHILDREN</span>&#8217;S <span class="caps">HOSPITAL</span> AT <span class="caps">MEMORIAL</span> <span class="caps">HOSPITAL</span>  <br />
The Colorado Springs Children&#8217;s Hospital is a <span class="caps">NACHRI</span> approved hospital within Memorial Hospital. Memorial Hospital has long set the standard for state-of-the-art health care in Colorado Springs. <span class="caps">CSCH</span> provides comprehensive medical and surgical care for children from neonates to adolescents, for any type of illness or injury. <span class="caps">CSCH</span> provides an 11 bed Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, a 60 bed Level <span class="caps">III</span> Neonatal Intensive Care Unit and a 30 bed pediatric ward.  </p>

<p>Memorial Hospital is a Level II trauma Center and has the only program in Souther Colorado committed to pediatric Trauma. <span class="caps">CSCH</span> is promoting Family Centered Care concepts within the hospital, thereby encouraging the family and the patient to be intimately involved in both making decisions about care and participating in healthcare activities.  </p>

<p>Through community outreach programs such as Think First, Trauma Nurses Talk Tough, <span class="caps">SAFE</span> <span class="caps">KIDS</span>, Drive Smart, Buckle Up Baby, and <span class="caps">SANE</span> (Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner) the Colorado Springs Children&#8217;s Hospital at Memorial Hospital seeks to raise awareness and help reduce illness and injury.  </p>

<span class="caps">COURSE</span> <span class="caps">DESCRIPTION</span>  
This perinatal/neonatal conference will focus on ethical, legal and economic decisions to:  
<ul>
	<li>Genetic screening</li>
	<li>Newborn screening</li>
	<li>Egg Freezing, Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis and Cloning</li>
	<li>Family Counseling</li>
	<li>Thresholds of Viability in the <span class="caps">NICU</span></li>
	<li>Neonatal pain management</li>
	<li>Spiritual aspects of care</li>
	<li>Parent perspective</li>
	<li>And more!</li>
</ul>

<p><span class="caps">AGENDA</span> <span class="caps">MAY</span> 11, 2005, <span class="caps">DAY</span> 1  <br />
0730-0815 Welcome and Introductions  <br />
John Burrington, M.D.  </p>

<p>0815-0900 Approachng Moral Problems: A Primer in Ethics  <br />
Douglas Diekema, M.D., <span class="caps">MPH</span>  </p>

<p>0900-0945 Ethics of Genetic Testing  <br />
Janet Thomas M.D.  </p>

<p>0945-1015 Counseling parents regarding Genetic Screening  <br />
Michelle Moore, MS. <span class="caps">CGC</span>  </p>

<p>1015-1030 Break  </p>

<p>1030-1110 Perspectives on Newborn Screening  <br />
Philip R. Vaughn M.D.  </p>

<p>1110-1200 Ethical and Policy Issues of Expanded Newborn Screening  <br />
Lainie Friedman Ross, M.D., Ph.D.  </p>

<p>1200-1230 Discussion of Morning Panel  <br />
moderated by Robert Telander M.D.  </p>

<p>1230-1330 Lunch  </p>

<p>1330-1415 Egg Freezing, Preimplanation Genetic Diagnosis and Cloning: Ethical Issues or Scientific Progress  <br />
Paul C. Magarelli, M.D., Ph.D.  </p>

<p>1415-1515 Genes, Memes, or Law-Supreme?  <br />
Casey Brank, JD  </p>

<p>1515-1530 Break  </p>

<p>1530-1615 Afternoon Panel  <br />
moderated by John Burrington, M.D.  </p>

<p>1615-1645 Review of day; Introduction to Family Centered Ethics  <br />
Douglas Diekema, M.D., <span class="caps">MPH</span>  </p>

<p>1645 Adjuorn  </p>

<p>1730-2000 Wine &amp; Cheese Event  </p>

<p><span class="caps">AGENDA</span> <span class="caps">MAY</span> 12, 2005, <span class="caps">DAY</span> 2  <br />
0730-0740 Welcome and Introduction  <br />
Sue Townsend, M.D.  </p>

<p>0740-0830 Prenatal diagnosis: more answers, more dilemmas  <br />
Elena Gates, M.D.  </p>

<p>0830-0910 Maternal/Fetal Surgery  <br />
Elena Gates, M.D.  </p>

<p>0910-1000 Minimizing Provider-Parent Conflicts  <br />
Tony Clark, M.D., JD  </p>

<p>1000-1015 Break  </p>

<p>1015-1115 Informed Consent  <br />
Robert &#8220;Skip&#8221; Nelson, M.D., Ph.D.  </p>

<p>1115-1200 Parental Reaction to Withdrawing/Withholding Treatment  <br />
Teresa Savage, Ph.D., RN  </p>

<p>1200-1300 Lunch  </p>

<p>1300-1345 Tresholds of Viability in the <span class="caps">NICU</span>  <br />
John Colin Partridge, M.D., Ph.D., <span class="caps">MPH</span>  </p>

<p>1345-1430 Unreasonable Parent Demads  <br />
Robert &#8220;Skip&#8221; Nelson, M.D., Ph.D.; Doug Diekema, M.D., <span class="caps">MPH</span>  </p>

<p>1430-1500 Delivering &#8220;Bad News&#8221;  <br />
John Colin Partridge, M.D., Ph.D., <span class="caps">MPH</span>  </p>

<p>1500-1515 Break  </p>

<p>1515-1600 Ethical Issues in the Treatment of Pain in the <span class="caps">NICU</span>  <br />
John Lantos, M.D.  </p>

<p>1600-1630 Speaker Panel  <br />
moderated by Sue Townsend, M.D.  </p>

<p>1630-1730 Spiritual Aspects of Perinatal Ethical Dilemmas  <br />
Spiritual Panel  </p>

<p>1730 Adjourn  </p>

<p>1930 Dinner Lecture &#8220;Lets Play, You be the Parent&#8221;  <br />
Mark Duster, M.D.  </p>

<p><span class="caps">AGENDA</span>, <span class="caps">MAY</span> 13, 2005, <span class="caps">DAY</span> 3  </p>

<p>0800-0810 Welcome and Introductions  <br />
Douglas Diekema, M.D., <span class="caps">MPH</span>  </p>

<p>0810-0940 Parent Stories  </p>

<p>0940-1000 Break  </p>

<p>1000-1045 Parent Panel  </p>

<p>1045-1130 Intersex Society  <br />
Kim Saviano  </p>

<p>1130-1215 Intersex Panel  <br />
Bruce Blyth, M.D.; Clifford A. Bloch, M.D.; Kim Saviano  </p>

<p>1215-1300 Lunch  </p>

<p>1300-1400 Foregoing Nutrition and Hydration  <br />
Douglas Diekema, M.D., <span class="caps">MPH</span>  </p>

<p>1400-1440 Case Discussion  <br />
Sue Townsend, M.D.  </p>

<p>1440-1530 Summary of Presentations; Future Directions for 2007 Forum  <br />
Douglas Diekema, M.D., <span class="caps">MPH</span></p>