---
title: "Australian Intersex Outcomes Study"
---

<br><br>

<span class="caps">MEDIA</span> <span class="caps">RELEASE</span><br><br>

Saturday, June 24, 2000<br><br>

<span class="caps">THE</span> <span class="caps">MEDICAL</span> <span class="caps">MANAGEMENT</span> OF <span class="caps">CHILDREN</span> <span class="caps">WITH</span> <span class="caps">INTERSEX</span> <span class="caps">CONDITIONS</span><br><br>

<span class="caps">CONTACTS</span> <br><br>

<br> 

  * Antoinette Briffa <A HREF="mailto:aissg@iprimus.com.au">aissg@iprimus.com.au</A><br> 
      * Garry Warne MD <A HREF="mailto:warneg@cryptic.rch.unimelb.edu.au">warneg@cryptic.rch.unimelb.edu.au</A><br></UL><br><br>
        The <A HREF="http://www.geocities.com/aissg/" TARGET="_top">Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome Support Group Australia</A> (<acronym title="Aust."><span class="caps">AISSG</span></acronym>)<br>is a peer support group providing information and support to people with<br>AIS and their families. Whilst not our primary function, one of the aims<br>of the <acronym title="Aust."><span class="caps">AISSG</span></acronym> is to increase awareness in the general medical community<br>of the personal issues faced by people with <span class="caps">AIS</span>.<br><br>
        
        The <span class="caps">AIS</span> Support Group is opposed to any unnecessary medical intervention<br>when treating any intersex condition. Having said this, the <acronym title="Aust."><span class="caps">AISSG</span></acronym><br>recognises there is still considerable debate over what constitutes "necessary<br>medical intervention" in such cases. The <acronym title="Aust."><span class="caps">AISSG</span></acronym> also recognises<br>that what was considered by most paediatricians and surgeons as best practice<br>for medical intervention 30 years ago may not be considered by some clinicians<br>to be best practice now. The <acronym title="Aust."><span class="caps">AISSG</span></acronym> is therefore of the opinion that<br>any clinician moving in a positive direction to influence or change best<br>practice to improve the regimes for treatment of children with intersex<br>conditions should be supported.<br><br>
        
        Members of the <acronym title="Aust."><span class="caps">AISSG</span></acronym> have been working with the Royal Children&#8217;s<br>Hospital Melbourne (<span class="caps">RCH</span>) in an attempt to assist the identification and<br>implementation of world&#8217;s best practice for the treatment of children with<br>intersex conditions. Earlier this year, the <span class="caps">RCH</span> announced its intention<br>to undertake an extensive bioethics study including 200 follow-up studies<br>of children with intersex conditions who have undergone some level of medical<br>intervention. The intended Bioethics study has formalised arrangements with<br>the <acronym title="Aust."><span class="caps">AISSG</span></acronym> to assist identification of best practice for the medical<br>management of children with intersex conditions. The <acronym title="Aust."><span class="caps">AISSG</span></acronym> hopes<br>that such initiatives that include both clinicians and support groups will<br>be seen by other medical centres world-wide as the only way of ensuring<br>that the needs of patients, their parents and clinicians are met adequately.<br> <br><br>
        
        Prof. Garry Warne of the <span class="caps">RCH</span> is a keen advocate of the <acronym title="Aust."><span class="caps">AISSG</span></acronym> and<br>was instrumental in its formation in Australia. He constantly avails himself<br>to the <acronym title="Aust."><span class="caps">AISSG</span></acronym> and its members. For the past 15 years, Prof. Warne<br>has been advocating full disclosure of the nature of such conditions to<br>children born with intersex conditions and their parents, despite the fact<br>that other clinicians worldwide still resist such disclosure. It is largely<br>through the efforts of Prof. Warne that the planned <span class="caps">RCH</span> Bioethics study<br>is to take place. A constant throughout discussions between the <acronym title="Aust."><span class="caps">AISSG</span></acronym><br>and Prof. Warne has been his keenness to listen to the personal experiences<br>of members and learn from them.  
        <br>