---
title: "BOTH to be screened in Seattle"
---

<div class="flexinode-body flexinode-2">
  <div class="flexinode-textarea-1">
    <div class="form-item">
      <br> <label>description:</label><br /> <br> 
      
      <p>
        Lisset Barcellos and Rafael Dumet’s feature length narrative film, <strong>Both</strong> (Solaris Films, 86 minutes), will screen at the <a href="http://www.seattlequeerfilm.com/">Seattle Lesbian & Gay Film Festival</a> on Saturday, October 15 at 9:45 p.m. Screening to take place at the historic Harvard Exit Theatre at 807 E. Roy (at Harvard) in Seattle&#8217;s Capital Hill neighborhood. The film&#8217;s star, Jackie Parker, is scheduled to attend. Jane Goto of <span class="caps"><span class="caps">ISNA</span> </span>will be on hand to answer questions and she looks forward to meeting local <span class="caps"><span class="caps">ISNA</span> </span>supporters at this event.
      </p><br><br>
      
      <p>
        <strong>Summary of Film</strong>: Beautiful bisexual Rebeca Duarte (Jackie Parker) works as a stunt double for indie action films in San Francisco. From rolling out of cars to setting herself on fire she puts her life at risk daily. Work, lovers and friends take up most of her time but inside something is missing. Rebeca feels strangely disconnected to her own body and can’t figure out why.
      </p><br><br>
      
      <p>
        One day she mysteriously receives a photo album from someone in Peru, where she had spent her childhood, containing pictures of her parents and her brother who died, but no images of herself. Feeling unsettled and intrigued she calls her mother. Getting no answers from her mother, Rebeca sets out to discover the mystery and unravel the web of lies that both the doctors and her parents have spun her whole life.
      </p><br><br>
      
      <p>
        Through her fight to uncover the truth, Rebeca discovers her own identity and a renewed passion for life.
      </p><br><br>
      
      <p>
        Both is a compelling and original indie feature that explores issues around gender ambiguity which is known to occur in one out of every 2,000 births. Medicalized since the 1950s, intersexuality has been treated as a disease and is often ‘cured’ without consent, through invasive surgery and hormones.
      </p><br><br>
      
      <p>
        A riveting drama, based on the experiences of the filmmaker, as well as many other intersex adults, Both tells a story of an issue that has been universally silenced through shame and secrecy.
      </p><br><br>
      
      <p>
        Standard disclaimer: Items posted at the <span class="caps"><span class="caps">ISNA</span> </span>events site are provided as a public service, and are not necessarily sponsored or endorsed by <span class="caps"><span class="caps">ISNA</span>.</span> To suggest an event for posting, click on &#8220;contact&#8221; at the upper right side of this screen.
      </p><br>
    </div><br>
  </div>
  
  <div class="flexinode-textfield-2">
    <div class="form-item">
      <br> <label>Location:</label><br /> <br> Harvard Exit Theatre, Seattle<br>
    </div><br>
  </div>
</div>