---
title: "Dr. Ellen Feder, &quot;Doctor's Orders: Parents\n    and Intersexed Children&quot;"
---

<br>

<br>FOR <span class="caps">IMMEDIATE</span> <span class="caps">RELEASE</span>  
  
<br>May 15, 2003<br><p class=m2><br>Dr. Ellen Feder, of American University, has written an excellent and important<br> chapter on parents and intersexed children in a volume on care and dependency.<br> The work is significant in that it is the first account of intersex based on<br> interviews with parents. Dr. Feder argues that the isolation of parents and<br> medicine&#8217;s failure to take account of their experiences is unfortunate; but<br> more than that, parents&#8217; isolation and confusion are built into the treatment<br> process itself.</p><br>

<p class="m2">
  That is, unlike some other situations in which parents with disabled children<br> are provided access to resources and support groups, the parents of children<br> with intersex conditions are treated instrumentally, primarily as the source<br> of informed consent to support doctor&#8217;s decision. But parents are not given<br> crucial information about their child&#8217;s condition and are not connected to<br> important social and psychological resources. The end result is that while<br> parents attempt to do the best they can for their children,their decisions<br> are shaped within a medical context that privileges expert knowledge over full<br> disclosure, and normalization over a child&#8217;s future sensation and qualify of<br> life.
</p><br>

<p class="m2">
  The full reference for this valuable scholarship is:<br /> <br> Ellen K. Feder, 2002, "Doctor&#8217;s Orders: Parents and Intersexed Children." Pp.<br> 294-320 in The Subject of Care: Feminist Perspectives on Dependency, edited<br> by Eva Feder Kittay and Ellen K. Feder. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield<br> Publishers, Inc.
</p><br>

<p class="m2">
  The article can be <a href="http://www.isna.org/pdf/Doctor%27s_Orders_Feder2002.pdf">downloaded</a>.
</p><br><p class=m2>&nbsp;<br></p><br>